
Survival of Colletotrichum acutatum in Soil and Plant Debris of Leatherleaf Fern 
Plant Disease / October 1997  1177 
Survival of Colletotrichum acutatum in Soil and Plant Debris of Leatherleaf Fern 
D. J. Norman and J. O. Strandberg, Plant Pathology Department, University of Florida, IFAS, Central Florida Re search and Education Center, 2807 Binion Rd., Apopka 32703 
Leatherleaf fern (Rumohra adiantiformis (G. Forster) Ching) is the largest cut foli age crop in the United States; the estimated 1993 wholesale value was $70 million (18).
Leatherleaf fern fronds are used in floral arrangements. Most are used domestically (North America), but about 25% are shipped to Europe and Japan. About 2,860 ha of leatherleaf fern is grown in Florida. Smaller amounts are grown in California, Hawaii,
Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas. Leatherleaf fern is a perennial crop, so production oc curs throughout the year. The ferns are grown under 73% shade cloth or oak trees.
Fungal diseases incited by Cylindrocla dium, Pythium, and Rhizoctonia spp. can affect leatherleaf fern (4,14), but fungi cides can control these diseases and mini mize losses. A new disease of leatherleaf fern (fern anthracnose) first appeared in
Florida in 1993 (15). A similar disease was reported a few years earlier on plantings in
Costa Rica (4). The fungal pathogen has been identified as a pathotype of Colleto trichum acutatum J.H. Simmonds. C. acu tatum also has been described as a path ogen of strawberry (7,8,11), citrus (22), flowering dogwood (3), peach (1), apple (1), pecan (1), and black gum (2). On leath erleaf fern, C. acutatum infects young, immature fronds and results in a black necrosis and deformation of leaflets that makes all infected fronds unmarketable.
Severely infected fern plantings appear as if burned due to extensive black necrosis on leaves.
We have observed production losses at tributed to C. acutatum approaching 100% in some ferneries. Since its appearance in 1993, the pathogen has spread rapidly, and as of December 1994, five counties in
Florida have reported the occurrence of the pathogen in their ferneries. We estimate (16) that one-half of the land in leatherleaf production has been infested.
The ecology and survival of C. coccodes (9), C. graminicola (19), C. truncatum (12), and C. lindemuthianum (6,17) in soil have been studied. The ecology of C. acutatum, which affects strawberry, pine, and citrus production (7,8,13,20–22), also has been studied. However, because the disease in cited by C. acutatum on leatherleaf fern is new to Florida, no substantial research has been completed on the ecology of this or ganism and its relationship to leatherleaf fern. Our study was undertaken to deter mine the potential for survival of C. acu tatum in soil and plant debris within leath erleaf ferneries and the ability of surviving inoculum to incite disease.MATERIALS AND METHODS
Infectivity tests. We determined the num ber of conidia necessary for infection and disease development on leatherleaf fern by spraying various concentrations of conidia on leatherleaf fern leaves. Conidia were harvested from cultures after 72 h of growth on potato dextrose agar (PDA) under Grow
Lux fluorescent light (Sylvania Inc., Dan vers, MA), 12-h day/night cycle, at 24°C, were diluted in sterile distilled water (SDW) to 1 × 107 conidia per ml, and were diluted serially for inoculations. Ten plants were inoculated with each dilution, and a SDW treatment was used as a control. Inoculum was applied with a hand-held sprayer to fern plants growing in 450-cm3 pots. Leaves were sprayed to runoff. Plants were placed in plastic bags for 24 h to maintain high humidity and placed in a glass house in randomized complete blocks. After 2 weeks, plants were evaluated for disease develop ment, and the presence and reproduction of
C. acutatum was confirmed. This experi ment was repeated two additional times, and the results were averaged.
Semiselective medium. Naturally oc curring populations of fungi and bacteria in soil make studies of specific organisms found in low numbers especially difficult.
To develop a semiselective medium that could be used both with controlled envi ronment and field samples, a selective mar ker was needed. The fungicide benomyl previously had been used extensively in leatherleaf fern production and did not con trol fern anthracnose. Thus, C. acutatum was expected to be tolerant to it. Induced resistance to benomyl is thought to arise from a single gene mutation and is easily induced and stable (10). However, resistance of C. acutatum to benomyl is considered by some to be natural and not the result of selection pressure (1). Benomyl has been included in semiselective media developed in other studies for isolation of Colleto trichum spp. from soil (5,7,9).
Tolerance of C. acutatum isolates from leatherleaf fern to benomyl was evaluated according to radial growth of fungal col onies and conidial germination on beno myl-amended PDA. Radial growth of four isolates from four ferneries was measured on PDA and PDA amended with 5, 50, 100, 500, and 1,000 µg of benomyl (Ben late WP, 50 a.i.) per ml. Three plugs from a 2-day-old culture growing on PDA were removed with a 4-mm cork borer and placed equidistant on 9-cm-diameter petri plates containing 20 ml of media; two replicate plates were used for each treatment. Plates ABSTRACT
Norman, D. J., and Strandberg, J. O. 1997. Survival of Colletotrichum acutatum in soil and plant debris of leatherleaf fern. Plant Dis. 81:1177-1180.
Leatherleaf fern anthracnose is incited by a new pathotype of Colletotrichum acutatum. Fern anthracnose appeared in Florida in 1993, has spread rapidly, and produces losses that approach 100% in some ferneries. To help develop recommendations for control and management of fern anthracnose, the survival of the pathogen in soil and diseased plant material and on clothing was investigated in laboratory and field experiments. Survival of conidia, sclerotia, and conidia in infected leaf debris was studied in soil maintained at five soil moisture levels. Survival of conidia and sclerotia declined rapidly under moist conditions (≥12% moisture, vol/wt), but un der dry conditions, viable conidia could be detected up to 12 months after incorporation into soil. Similar results were obtained in field experiments in which infected leaf debris was buried in soil. Viable conidia were recovered for up to 3 months in leaf debris stored under laboratory conditions. Conidia applied to denim fabric were recovered up to 5 weeks after application. This indicated that contaminated clothing could transport conidia effectively within and between ferneries. Inoculating ferns with dilutions of conidia demonstrated that at least 100 conidia per ml is required to infect and colonize leatherleaf fern leaves. This threshold provides an estimate of levels of conidia populations likely to result in disease and levels that sanitation or cultural practices must exceed to be effective management methods.
Additional keywords: cut foliage, fungus 
Corresponding author: D. J. NormanE-mail: djn@icon.apk.ufl.edu 
Florida Agricultural Experiment Station Journal Ser ies R-05704. 
Accepted for publication 11 July 1997.
Publication no. D-1997-0807-01R © 1997 The American Phytopathological Society 1178  Plant Disease / Vol. 81 No. 10 were incubated under Gro-Lux fluorescent lights, 12-h day/night cycle. Radial growth of the six colonies in each treatment was measured daily for 5 days. Treatment means were compared with Tukey’s least signifi cant difference (LSD) test.
The effect of benomyl on germination of conidia of C. acutatum was examined on 10 isolates obtained from 10 separate fer neries. Conidial suspensions (1 × 105 conidia per ml) from 48-h-old PDA cultures were spread on 9-cm-diameter petri plates con taining 20 ml of PDA or PDA amended with 1,000 µg of benomyl per ml. Cultures were incubated as described previously.
After 20 h, 300 conidia were examined under magnification, and the percent ger mination was determined. This experiment was repeated three times. Means were compared with Tukey’s LSD test. Based on observable inhibition of competitive soil fungi, a concentration of 50 µg of benomyl per ml was selected for all subsequent soil assays and field work. Chlortetracycline (100 µg/ml) was added to limit bacterial growth. When C. acutatum was grown on this semiselective medium under fluores cent lights, colonies turned a bright salmon orange and were easily identifiable.
Survival of C. acutatum in soil and plant debris. Sandy soil (pH 6.9) was col lected from a fernery that was not infested with C. acutatum, air-dried, and sieved through a soil screen (1.7-mm opening) to remove large organic particles. Sieved, air dried soil (100 g) was placed in plastic
Magenta (Chicago) vessels, 7.2 × 7.2 × 9.6 cm, with plastic lids. To simulate field conditions, five soil moisture contents that ranged from air-dried to water-saturated were examined. Conidia of C. acutatum isolate 95-39 (previously used in benomyl sensitivity testing) were harvested from 48-h-old PDA cultures and suspended in
SDW. Concentrations were adjusted with the aid of a hemacytometer to 8.5 × 106 conidia per ml. Spore suspension (1 ml) was added to vessels containing 100 g of soil and mixed by hand. Soil moistures were adjusted with SDW to desired levels.
The soil was hydrated (based on oven dry weights, vol/wt) to 1, 3, 6, 12 (–2.5 kPa), or 24% moisture content. The vessels were sealed and placed in an incubator at 25°C.
SDW was added as needed to maintain a constant level of soil moisture. Each treat ment was replicated three times, and each experiment was repeated at least once. For assay, 1-g soil subsamples were removed at weekly intervals for 8 weeks, then at 3 week intervals until viable conidia were no longer detected. Each subsample was sus pended in 10 ml of SDW, mixed, diluted in
SDW to appropriate dilutions, and 0.5 ml of the dilution was spread on plates of semiselective media. Cultures were incu bated as previously described, and salmon orange colonies were counted after 72 h of growth. To confirm that colonies observed on selective media were C. acutatum and that they maintained pathogenicity, 10 col onies (2 from each soil moisture treatment) were selected from the subsamples taken ≥29 weeks after incorporating spore sus pensions into soil. These isolates were pur ified, grown on PDA, and spray-inoculated on leatherleaf fern plants (1 × 107 conidia per ml) as described for infectivity tests.
To examine survival of C. acutatum in diseased leaf debris incorporated into soil, diseased fern fronds were collected, air dried, and chopped into small pieces (0.1 to 0.5 cm2). Samples (1 g) of chopped leaves were added to 100 g of sieved soil in Magenta vessels and adjusted to the five previously specified soil moistures. Treat ments were replicated three times. Samples were obtained and evaluated as described previously. The vessels were maintained in the laboratory at 25°C.
Survival in leaf debris of C. acutatum was examined in 1-g portions of chopped, infected, leatherleaf fronds placed in plas tic Magenta vessels. Three replicate vessels were used for each of two treatments, in which leaves were either left dried or moist ened with 2 ml of SDW. Subsamples (0.1 g) of leaf debris were removed at weekly in tervals for 8 weeks, diluted in SDW, plated on benomyl-amended PDA, and popula tions of C. acutatum were measured.
To study the survival of sclerotia in soil, we spread 0.5 ml of conidial suspension (1 × 106 conidia per ml) on 9-cm-diameter acidified PDA plates (PDA supplemented with lactic acid at 0.25 ml/liter). Plates were incubated for 1 month under conditions de scribed previously, and the contents of 18 plates were ground in a blender with 300 ml of SDW. The agar-fungal mixture was rinsed through soil sieves with 250- and 90-µm openings. Sclerotia trapped in the smaller sieve were repeatedly washed with distilled water until no conidia could be observed in the rinsate under microscopic examination.
Sclerotia were centrifuged at 5,000 rpm (9,000 × g) for 10 min, and the liquid-agar supernatant was decanted. Aliquots of the sclerotium pellet (0.5 g) were added to 100 g of sieved fern soil in Magenta vessels (cal culated as 6 × 103 sclerotia per g of soil).
Treatments were replicated three times, and samples were plated on amended PDA and evaluated as described previously.
To compare controlled-environment results with survival of C. acutatum in the field, three small shade structures (1 × 1 m, 70% shade) were constructed in an open field.
Overhead irrigation was supplied to main tain moisture levels above 4% soil mois ture, as suggested for fern production. To maintain this level of soil moisture, tensi 
Fig. 1. Percentage of leatherleaf fern plants in fected by Colletotrichum acutatum after inocu lation with suspensions containing different con centrations of conidia.
Fig. 2. Number of viable Colletotrichum acu tatum conidia recovered from soil maintained in the laboratory at 25°C at 1 (■), 3 (●), 6 (▼), 12 (▲), and 24% (◆) soil moisture over a 36 day period.
Fig. 3. Number of Colletotrichum acutatum CFU recovered from diseased leaf debris incorpor ated into soil maintained at 25°C in the labora tory at 1 (■), 3 (●), 6 (▼), 12 (▲), and 24% (◆) soil moisture over a 56-day period. 
Plant Disease / October 1997  1179 ometers connected to a data logger were used to monitor soil moisture at a depth of 3 cm. Infected fern fronds were chopped as described previously, and 1-g samples were placed in 2.5 × 5-cm nylon mesh bags. Thir teen bags were buried 3 cm deep in each shade structure. Bags were recovered from each structure at 7-day intervals for 4 weeks and thereafter every 3 weeks until C. acu tatum could not be detected. Samples were processed and evaluated as described pre viously. This study was conducted from
July through November, when air tempera tures ranged from 37 to 2°C, respectively.
Survival of C. acutatum conidia on clothing. Concentrations as high as 270 viable conidia per cm2 of denim fabric were recovered from fern harvesters during a 5-h harvesting period (data not shown).
To test the ability of these C. acutatum conidia to survive on clothing, a spore sus pension of 1 × 106 conidia per ml was sprayed on cotton denim fabric. The fabric was air-dried, cut into 1-cm2 sections, and stored in vessels at 25°C. Once weekly, three 1-cm2 sections of cloth were removed, placed in SDW, and numbers of surviving spores were determined on the semiselec tive medium. This experiment was repeated three times.RESULTS
Infectivity tests. At inoculum levels ≥1 × 106 conidia per ml, all inoculated fern plants developed symptoms within 7 days. Below this concentration, an approximately linear decrease in disease incidence was observed at levels down to 100 conidia per ml (Fig. 1).
No infections were observed when concen trations of conidia in the inoculum were below 100 conidia per ml.
Semiselective medium. Of the four C. acutatum isolates tested, radial growth on benomyl-amended PDA was significantly less (P = 0.05) than growth on PDA, but all colonies grew and sporulated. However, no significant differences in growth were observed between the five levels of beno myl tested. After 5 days, colony diameter in the presence of benomyl decreased 63% (4.19 ± 0.42 mm) compared to growth on
PDA (11.31 ± 0.36 mm). No significant differences in conidia germination were observed between PDA and benomyl amended PDA (1,000 µg/ml) (99.50 ± 0.62% and 99.50 ± 0.43%, respectively).
Survival of C. acutatum in soil and leaf debris. Populations of C. acutatum conidia recovered from laboratory soil tests decreased steadily, especially under moist or saturated conditions (Fig. 2). Within 1 week, detectable populations decreased by more than 30% for all treatments; within 4 weeks, numbers of viable conidia fell be low 100 conidia per g of soil with soil moistures ≥6% (we assumed that conidia were the CFU recovered). However, under dry conditions (1%), it took 105 days for populations to fall below 100 conidia per g of soil, but lower numbers of conidia could be recovered for up to 12 months. All re isolates of C. acutatum from soil main tained their pathogenicity toward leather leaf fern and formed lesions within 2 weeks of inoculation.
When infected leaf debris was added to soil and incubated under controlled envi ronmental conditions, concentrations of de tectable conidia increased during the first week, except under very moist conditions (Fig. 3). However, long-term survival at various soil moistures followed a pattern similar to that observed for conidia directly added to soil. Nevertheless, the rate of de cline was slightly less for soil-incorporated leaf debris: it required between 5 to 6 weeks for detectable populations to fall below 100 conidia per g for soil moistures 3% and greater. Within dry soil (1%), conidia associated with leaf debris maintained via bility at levels above 100 conidia per g for 31 weeks. Similar rates of decline in viable conidia also were observed when leaf de bris without soil was stored in plastic con tainers under dry or moist conditions (Fig. 4).
Survival of C. acutatum in leaf debris buried outdoors in soil was similar to that in a controlled environment, in that initial populations increased within the first week and then steadily decreased over a 5-month period (Fig. 5). Viable conidia were detected from leaf debris samples until 126 days af ter incorporation in soil; however, the as sumed inoculation threshold (100 conidia 
Fig 4. Number of Colletotrichum acutatum CFU recovered from air-dried (■) or dampened (●) diseased leaf debris maintained in the laboratory over a 56-day period. The temperature was main tained at 25°C.
Fig 5. Number of Colletotrichum acutatum CFU recovered from diseased leaf debris buried in field plots over a 126-day period.
Fig. 6. Number of Colletotrichum acutatum scler otia recovered from soil maintained in the lab oratory at 25°C at 1 (■), 3 (●), 6 (▼), 12 (▲), and 24% (◆) soil moisture over a 56-day per iod.
Fig. 7. Number of viable Colletotrichum acu tatum conidia recovered after spray applications of 106 conidia per ml to denim fabric maintained at 25°C over a 42-day period. The solid lines indicate three separate experiments, and the dotted line represents the mean of these ex periments.
 1180  Plant Disease / Vol. 81 No. 10 per g of soil) was reached within 80 days after incorporation.
Sclerotia of C. acutatum added to soil held under laboratory conditions maintained high viability (≥100 sclerotia per g of soil) under dry conditions for 26 weeks; how ever, under moist conditions (≥12%), pop ulations declined to very low levels by day 56 (Fig. 6). Viable sclerotia at lower num bers were recovered consistently from soil for up to 47 weeks after incorporation.
Survival of C. acutatum on clothing.
Numbers of viable conidia recovered from denim fabric held at 25°C and low humid ity decreased at a steady rate (Fig. 7). Num bers of conidia sufficient to cause infection (100 CFU/ml) were recovered up to 4 weeks after placement on fabric, although some viable conidia were recovered for up to 42 days after treatment.DISCUSSION
The number of conidia necessary for in fection of leatherleaf fern under ideal con ditions was determined to be approximately 100 CFU/ml in inoculum suspensions ap plied to fern leaves. With an estimate of the effective inoculum threshold needed for fern anthracnose and knowledge of initial conidia populations present, the survival rate of the pathogen in soil or leaf debris can be better estimated. These estimates are important for formulating disease management strategies and cultural controls. C. acutatum infects only immature fronds from the time they break the soil until they fully expand and mature; this interval ranges from 7 to 14 days depending on weather conditions (16).
Acervuli can form on infected fronds within 3 to 4 days of infection, and conidia are washed or fall onto newly emerging fronds or onto soil. Once the disease is introduced into a production facility, the fungal life cycle becomes continuous, and subsequent disease losses can be extensive. The sur vival of conidia in soil and plant debris is important to formulation of disease man agement strategies, including decontamina tion of equipment and cultural control meth ods. When left for an extended time on
PDA, C. acutatum produces sclerotia, which are especially common at acid pH. The role, if any, that sclerotia play in survival of this fungus under normal field conditions is unknown, because sclerotia have been ob served only under laboratory conditions.
Eastburn and Gubler (7) monitored the survival of C. acutatum in strawberry tis sue over a 7-week period at three tempera tures (11, 25, and 40°C) and three soil mois tures (flooded, moist [10.6%], and air dry).
Recovery of C. acutatum from infected tis sue declined rapidly under flooded soil con ditions with soil temperatures ≥25°C, whereas recovery from tissue samples was 100% after 7 weeks at 10 and 25°C. Similar re sults were obtained in our study for sur vival of conidia, sclerotia, or conidia in in fected leatherleaf fern debris under high and low soil moistures.
Fern harvesting occurs throughout the year and in all types of weather, including rain fall. Harvesters are contracted to work in different ferneries and may harvest in mul tiple fields and farms within the same day.
Transport of conidia on clothing, tools, and equipment are thought to be major mechan isms by which the fungus has spread rapidly within and between ferneries (16). Wet cloth ing can easily adsorb hydrophilic spores that are later transferred onto the surfaces of susceptible leaves. Our results demonstrate that conidia also can persist on clothing for periods that provide excellent potential for long-distance transport and introduction into uninfested ferneries.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported in part by the Fred 
C. Gloeckner Foundation Inc. and the Florida De partment of Agriculture and Consumer Services. 
LITERATURE CITED  1. Bernstein, B., Zehr, E. I., Dean, R. A., and Shabi, 
E. 1995. Characteristics of Colletotrichum from peach, apple, pecan, and other hosts. Plant Dis. 79:478-482.
  2. Britton, K. O., and Redlin, S. C. 1995. Collet otrichum acutatum causes anthracnose of black gum (Nyssa sylvatica). Plant Dis. 79:1187.
  3. Britton, K. O., and Redlin, S. C. 1995. Damp ing-off of flowering dogwood seedlings caused by Colletotrichum acutatum and Fusarium oxy sporum. Plant Dis. 79:1188.
  4. Chase, A. R. 1993. Diseases of leatherleaf fern and their control. Univ. Fla. Inst. Food Agric. Sci. Central Fla. Res. Edu. Center-Apopka Res. Rep. RH-93-18.  5. Coates, L. M., Erwin, J. A. G., and Muirhead,
I. F. 1993. The use of a benomyl-resistant mu tant to demonstrate latency of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides in avocado fruit. Aust. J. Agric. Res. 44:763-772.
  6. Dillard, H. R., and Cobb, A. C. 1993. Survival of Colletotrichum lindemuthianum in bean debris in New York State. Plant Dis. 77:1233-1238.
  7. Eastburn, D. M., and Gubler, W. D. 1990. Straw berry anthracnose: Detection and survival of
Colletotrichum acutatum in soil. Plant Dis. 74:161-163.
  8. Eastburn, D. M., and Gubler, W. D. 1992.
Effect of soil moisture and temperature on the survival of Colletotrichum acutatum. Plant Dis. 76:841-842.
  9. Farley, J. D. 1972. A selective medium for as say of Colletotrichum coccodes in soil. Phyto pathology 62:1288-1293.
  10. Hastie, A. C., and Georgopoulos, S. G. 1971.
Mutational resistance to fungitoxic benzi midazole derivations in Aspergillus nidulans.J. Gen. Microbiol. 67:371-373.
  11. Henz, G. P., Boiteux, L. S., and Lopes, C. A. 1992. Outbreak of strawberry anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum acutatum in central Brazil. Plant Dis. 76:212.
  12. Khan, M., and Sinclair, J. B. 1991. Effect of soil temperature on infection of soybean roots by sclerotia-forming isolates of Colletotrichum truncatum. Plant Dis. 75:282-285.
  13. Nair, J., Newhook, F. J., and Corbin, J. B. 1983. Survival of Colletotrichum acutatum f.
sp. pinea in soil and pine debris. Trans. Br. Mycol. Soc. 81:53-63.
  14. Stamps, R. H. 1992. Commercial leatherleaf fern culture in the United States of America. Pages 243-249 in: Fern Horticulture: Past, Pres ent and Future Perspectives. Proc. Int. Symp. Cultivation Propagation Pteridophytes. Intercept
Ltd., Andover, England.  15. Strandberg, J. O. 1994. Efficacy of selected fungicides for control of anthracnose in leath erleaf fern—A preliminary report. Univ. Fla. Inst. Food Agric. Sci. Central Fla. Res. Edu. Center. Cut Foliage Grower 9(11/12):1-4.
  16. Strandberg, J. O., Stamps, R. H., and Norman,
D. J. 1996. Fern anthracnose: A guide for ef fective disease management. Univ. Fla., Agric. Exp. Stn. Tech. Bull. 900.
  17. Tu, J. C. 1983 Epidemiology of anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum lindemuthianum on white bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) in southern
Ontario: Survival of the pathogen. Plant Dis. 67:402-404.
  18. U.S. Department of Agriculture. 1993. Floricul ture crops, summary. U.S. Department of Ag riculture, Statistics Service, Agricultural Sta tistics Board, Washington, DC.  19. Vizvary, M. A., and Warren, H. L. 1982. Sur vival of Colletotrichum graminicola in soil.Phytopathology 72:522-525.
  20. Wilson, L. L., Madden, L. V., and Ellis, M. A. 1990. Influence of temperature and wetness duration on infection of immature and mature strawberry fruit by Colletotrichum acutatum.Phytopathology 80:111-116.
  21. Wilson, L. L., Madden, L. V., and Ellis, M. A. 1992. Overwinter survival of Colletotrichum acutatum in infected strawberry fruit in Ohio. Plant Dis. 76:948-950.
  22. Zulfiqar, M., Brlansky, R. H., and Timmer, L. W. 1996. Infection of flower and vegetative tis sues of citrus by Colletotrichum acutatum and
Colletotrichum gloeosporioides. Mycologia 88: 121-128.   