PlantDisease76n10_976.pdf Charles M. Howard (deceased) University of Florida, Dover John L. Maas 
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Beltsvills, MD 
Cralg K. Chandler and Earl E. Afbregts University of Florida, Dover 
Anthracnose of Strawberry Caused by the Colletotrichum Complex in Florida 
Strawberries, perhaps the most delec- table of fruits, are grown for their attrac- tiveness and exquisite flavor in most tem- perate and many tropical areas of the world. Some feel the world would indeed be a dull place without the strawberry to perk taste buds and enliven desserts and pastries. 
Strawberry growing can be traced back thousands of years. The origins of strawberry cultivation in Europe is well documented in literature and art (5,10, 27). Frogoria vesca L. (diploid, 2n=14 chromosomes) and F* moschara (hexa- ploid, 2n=42 chromosomes) were cultured in palace and church gardens. 
Strawberry culture in the New World of 
Nor th  and South America is less well documented. North American natives appreciated the appearance of F. virgini- ana Duchesne (octaploid, 2n=56 chromosomes) fruit in spring, but this species apparently was not cultivated until Europeans began exploring and settling North America. However, native inhabitants of Chile and Peru had selected and cultured superior variants of F. chiloenris (L.) Qucbesne (octo- ploid, 2n=56 chromosomes) well before the arrival of the conquistadores in the 16th century. 
The modern s t r a w h r ~ ,  Era~aria X ananassa Duchesne, is  of relatively recent origin, Not until the North American F. virginiana and the South American F. thiloensis were brought together and hybridized in Europe around 1750 did the progenitor of the strawberry we know today come into being. The high degree 
Florida Expcrimenr Stations Journal Series No. R- 0186P. 
Dr. Albrcgis's addms is: University of Florida. 
IFAS, Agr~cultural Raearch and Education Center, 13138 Lewis Gallagher Road, Dover, FL 33527. * 1992ThaAmsrlcan Rhytopathaloglcal Society 976 Plant DiseaseNol. 76 No. 10 of genetic heterozygosity in Fragaria spp. has enabled the development of straw- krry  cultivars adapted to widely varying environmental conditions and resistant to several diseases and pests. Available today are cultivars that can survive the bitterly cold winters of Alaska and others that can perform well in the long, hot season of Pretoria, South Africa. 
Although a minor crop, strawberries provide a major source of income for many fruit growers and nursery growers. 
Strawberries were grown on nearly 20,000 ha in the United States in 1989. 
Total production for fresh market and processing use totaled 555,000 t and was valued at $520 million, Florida i s  second only to California in the production of fresh-market strawberries. Strawberries for U.S. winter production (December through March) are grown on approxi- mately 2,400 ha. 
The major cultural problems for the 
Florida strawberry industry are I )  ant hracnose diseases, 2) year! y infesta- tions of the two-spotted spider mite (T~rranychus uriicae Koch), and 3) variability in the quality of nursery transplants. Commercial fields are estab- lished on an annual basis, as in Califor- nia. Freshly dug transplants are obtained from nurseries in Florida or in the northern states and Canada. Use of transplants from northern nurseries is necessary to avoid anthracnose disease problems and to obtain plants that have received some natural chilling to induce floral bud initiation. 
The warm, humid climate of Florida that permits year-round growth of strawberry plants in nursery and com- mercial fields is ideal for the development of a large number of diseases. especially anthracnose. Anthracnose diseases of strawberry have become significant in other areas of Narth America and the world. Because of the importance of strawberrv anthracnose in FIorida and increasing concern for the disease in other strawberry-producing areas of the world, we are presenting the history of its occurrence, symptoms caused by the 
Collero~richum complex in Florida, and control measures developed for Florida strawberry growers. 
Hlstory of Anthracnose in the United States 
The term "anthracnose" first was used to describe a new disease of strawberry caused by CoIIetotrichum fraguriae 
Brooks (I). "Strawberry anthracnose" has continued to be used as a general term to identify all diseases of strawberry caused by species of Collesorrichurn. 
Strawberry anthracnase diseases have been described as caused by C. acutarum 
J. H. Sirnmonds, C. gloeosporioides (Penz.) Penz. & Sacc. in Penz. (teleo- morph of CRornereIIa cingulata (Stone- man) Spauld. & H. Schrenk.). and C. demotiurn (Pers.) Grove. C. demarium only occasionaEly causes strawberry fruit rots and is not discussed here. 
Anthracnose fungi may attack crowns, petioles, leaves, fruit trusses, flowers and buds, and fruit. The ability of the fungi to attack more than one plant part, and the Fact that several pathogen species are involved, adds to the complex nature of strawberry anthracnose. 
Brooks reported in 1931 (1) that C. fra~ariae caused spotting and girdling of runners and later reported (2) that it also caused spotting of petiotes and a crown rot in a summer nursery that resulted in wilting and death of plants. Researchers in Louisiana found all of these symptoms and reported that crown rot also occurred in the fruit production field (3,13,14). In 1972, Howard (16) described a f r u ~ t  rot in Florida that was caused by C.fragariae. 
Fruit rots caused by anthracnose fungi have also occurred in several other areas of the United States, t.g., GIoeosporium sp. in Maryland (21), C. acuta#um in 
Ohio (9), and CoIietotrichum spp. in 