
Control of Colletotrichum acutatum in Strawberry Under Laboratory, Greenhouse, and Field Conditions 
Plant Disease / July 1997  749 
Control of Colletotrichum acutatum in Strawberry
Under Laboratory, Greenhouse, and Field Conditions 
S. Freeman and Y. Nizani, Department of Plant Pathology, ARO, The Volcani Center, Bet Dagan 50250; and
S. Dotan, S. Even, and T. Sando, Ministry of Agriculture, Extension Service, Ra’anana 43208, Israel 
Species of the fungal plant pathogen
Colletotrichum are responsible for straw berry (Fragariae × ananassa Duch.) an thracnose, one of the major diseases of this crop. Major species that cause strawberry anthracnose are C. acutatum J. H. Sim monds, C. fragariae Brooks, and C. gloeosporioides (Penz.) Penz. & Sacc. (7,10,11). Symptoms of the disease are manifested in a variety of phases. Infection of mother plants with anthracnose may result in collapse of the entire plant due to crown rot. In the nursery, lesions are formed on stolons that eventually girdle the runners, and unrooted daughter plants distal to the lesion wilt and die. Death of daughter plants in the nursery and in field transplants can also be caused by crown rot. Infected transplants are capable of spreading the disease from the nursery to the field. In strawberry fruit production fields, entire crops can be destroyed by anthracnose under conducive environ mental and cultural conditions. Leaves, flowers, and green and ripe fruit may be extremely susceptible to anthracnose, which can cause loss of all fruit in some cases (7). In central Brazil, a recent epi demic of anthracnose caused high yield loss, ranging from 30 to 68% (6).
During the months of May to September in 1995 and 1996, severe outbreaks of strawberry anthracnose were observed in many strawberry-growing nurseries in
Israel. Following transplantation, entire beds of strawberry plants collapsed in the field due to crown rot. The causal agent was shown to be C. acutatum (2,3). Re cently, various molecular techniques have been used to accurately and reliably iden tify the species of Colletotrichum causing strawberry anthracnose (4,5). The poly merase chain reaction (PCR) method was consequently used to verify that more than 100 Israeli isolates are from the species C. acutatum (3).
Fungicide application for the control of strawberry anthracnose is limited due to restrictions imposed on pesticide usage and susceptibility of strawberry plants to Coll etotrichum during all stages of develop ment, including flowers and green and ripe fruit. Anthracnose infection in plant nurs eries can be reduced by producing disease free propagation material. This is a prereq uisite for establishing disease-free nursery transplants. Control measures practiced in the United States rely on frequent applica tions of the protectant fungicides captan and thiram (13). However, benzimidazole fungicides are not effective due to the common occurrence of resistant Colle totrichum strains (13). Certain fungicides, including propiconazole, have been re ported to successfully limit in vitro growth of C. fragariae (12), and fluazinam, a pro tectant fungicide, confers good control of strawberry anthracnose in post-harvest berries (15).
In this study, we evaluated the fungi cides prochloraz-Zn, prochloraz-Mn (both protectant sterol-biosynthesis inhibitors), captan, folpet, a combined formulation of prochloraz-Zn and folpet, propiconazole, difenoconazole, and a heat treatment for the control of C. acutatum in naturally infected strawberry plants under labora tory, greenhouse, and field conditions.
Fungicides were applied at the transplant stage to determine whether a single-dip treatment is sufficient for disease control.MATERIALS AND METHODS
Fungal cultures and plant material.
Three isolates of C. acutatum from natu rally infected strawberry (cv. Oso Grande) plants (TUT-40A from stolons, TUT-112A from fruit, and TUT-127A from roots) were used in this study. Isolates were maintained on modified Mathur’s medium (MS) at 25°C in the dark, as previously described (14). Cultivars Ofra, Malach (clone 156), and Hadas (clone 543), which are susceptible to strawberry anthracnose and were naturally infected with C. acutatum, were used in laboratory, green house, and field experiments.
In vitro fungicide assay. Fungicide amended petri plates (9-cm-diameter) were used for assaying in vitro activity of captan (Marpan, 50WP, Makhteshim Chemical
Works Ltd., Beer-Sheva, Israel), folpet (Folpan, 50WP, Makhteshim), prochloraz
Zn (Mirage, 50WP, Makhteshim), pro chloraz-Mn (Octave, 50WP, Agrevo Ltd.,
Cambridge, UK), combined prochloraz-Zn and folpet (Mirage-F, 15 and 60WP, re spectively, Makhteshim), propiconazole (Tilt, 25% EC, Ciba-Geigy Corp., Basel,
Switzerland) and difenoconazole (Score, 25% EC, Ciba-Geigy Corp.) towards C. acutatum. Mycelial disks (5-mm-diameter removed from the margins of 4- to 5-day old cultures) were transferred to MS amended with the tested fungicides at vari ous concentrations, from 0 to 500 µg/ml.
Radial growth of the mycelium was meas ABSTRACT
Freeman, S., Nizani, Y., Dotan, S., Even, S., and Sando, T. 1997. Control of Colletotrichum acutatum in strawberry under laboratory, greenhouse, and field conditions. Plant Dis. 81:749 752.
Various fungicides and a heat treatment were assessed for their ability to control strawberry anthracnose caused by the fungus Colletotrichum acutatum under laboratory, greenhouse, and field conditions. The effective dose causing 50% inhibition of mycelial growth (ED50) was 30.5, 12.2, 0.2, 0.15, 0.05, 0.07, and 0.05 µg/ml for the fungicides folpet, captan, propiconazole, difenoconazole, combined prochloraz-Zn/folpet, prochloraz-Zn, and prochloraz-Mn, respec tively. In laboratory experiments, infection in segments of strawberry runners treated with pro chloraz-Zn reached 60%, which was significantly reduced as compared to combined prochloraz
Zn/folpet (90%), captan, folpet, and water controls (100%). In the greenhouse, numbers of natu rally infected transplants killed were significantly reduced by all fungicides and the heat treat ment (5 min at 49°C) as compared to the non-treated control. Prochloraz-Zn was the most ef fective chemical control treatment but did not differ significantly from the heat treatment. In field experiments conducted during 1995 and 1996, numbers of naturally infected strawberry transplants killed were significantly reduced by all fungicide treatments relative to the non treated control. Percent reduction of transplant mortality in the field was 93.3, 93.1, 66.7, 37.7, and 29.1 for prochloraz-Mn, prochloraz-Zn, combined prochloraz-Zn/folpet, propiconazole, and difenoconazole, respectively.
Corresponding author: S. Freeman
E-mail: vpsfreem@volcani.agri.gov.il 
Contribution No. 2019-E, 1996 series, from the
Agricultural Research Organization, The VolcaniCenter, Bet Dagan, Israel. 
Accepted for publication 20 March 1997.
Publication no. D-1997-0424-08R © 1997 The American Phytopathological Society 750  Plant Disease / Vol. 81 No. 7 ured periodically to determine percent control (8). The effective dose causing 50% inhibition of mycelial growth (ED50) was calculated by log/probit transforma tion of percent control. The experiment was conducted twice using each of the three C. acutatum isolates. Similar results were reproduced and thus data were pooled. Because no significant differences were observed between prochloraz-Mn and prochloraz-Zn, in further experiments, except for the field trials, only prochlorazZn was assessed.
Control of C. acutatum in naturally infected strawberry runners. Naturally infected strawberry runners (cv. Hadas) were segmented into 1.5-cm sections and surface-disinfested for 30 s in 3% sodium hypochlorite. The segments were then submerged for 1 min in sterile tap water (untreated control) or in an aqueous solu tion of the following fungicides: captan (2.5 g/liter), prochloraz-Zn (1 g/liter), folpet (4 g/liter), or combined prochloraz
Zn (1 g/liter) and folpet (4 g/liter). Similar concentrations of prochloraz have been used in the past for control of almond an thracnose caused by C. gloeosporioides.
Runner segments were dried on sterile
Whatman filter paper and then plated on
MS supplemented with 2.5 µg (a.i.) iprodi one (Rovral 50WP, Rhone Poulenc Inc.,
Lyons, France) per ml to reduce contami nating fungi. Each treatment consisted of 25 segments, five segments per plate.
Control efficacy was evaluated by growth of C. acutatum from the disinfested, fungi cide-treated runners. The proportion of runner segments showing visible growth of
C. acutatum was evaluated over 12 days.
The experiment was conducted three times and data were pooled. Evaluations of cap tan and folpet were discontinued in green house and field experiments due to the high concentrations required and their limited success in mycelial inhibition and pathogen control under laboratory condi tions.
Control of C. acutatum in naturally infected strawberry transplants in the greenhouse. Various fungicides and a heat treatment, routinely used in California,
United States (13), were evaluated for their control of C. acutatum in naturally infected transplants (cvs. Ofra, Malach, and Hadas). Transplants were submerged for 10 min in tap water (non-treated control) or in aqueous solutions of prochloraz-Zn (1 g/liter), combined prochloraz-Zn (1 g/liter) and folpet (4 g/liter), propiconazole (2.5 g/liter), or difenoconazole (2.5 g/liter). The experiment also included a heat treatment in which transplants were submerged for 5 min in a heated water bath at 49°C. Plants were then potted (in 11-cm-diameter pots) in a vermiculite/peat soilless mix (1:1, vol/vol). Plants were maintained under supplementary incandescent light for a 12 h photoperiod in the greenhouse at 25°C, and watered daily as necessary. Each treatment consisted of 25 plants set in a randomized design. Disease incidence was expressed as percent transplant mortality after 6 weeks. The experiment was con ducted four times and data were pooled.
Control of C. acutatum in naturally infected field transplants. Field control of
C. acutatum in naturally infected trans plants was evaluated in the Sharon region in 1995 and in the Lev Hasharon region in 1996. Transplants were submerged for 10 min in tap water, prochloraz-Mn (1 g/liter), prochloraz-Zn (1 g/liter), combined pro chloraz-Zn (1 g/liter) and folpet (4 g/liter), propiconazole (2.5 g/liter), or difenocona zole (2.5 g/liter). In the 1995 experiment, treated transplants (cv. Malach) were then planted in a randomized design in the field on 2 October, with four replicates of 32 plants each per treatment. The percentage of plants killed was assessed 34 days later, on 5 November. In the 1996 experiment, treated transplants (cv. Ofra) were planted in a randomized design in the field on 18
September, with five replicates of 50 plants each per treatment. Percent plant mortality was assessed 20 days later, on 7 October. Both field experiments were terminated before complete mortality of the plants in the control plots to allow the farmers ade quate time to fumigate the soil and replant healthy plants. Mean separation of the data was analyzed according to Fisher’s pro tected least significant difference (LSD) test, at P < 0.05.RESULTS
In vitro inhibition of C. acutatum. The effective dose causing 50% inhibition (ED50) was calculated for the fungicides folpet, captan, difenoconazole, propicona zole, combined prochloraz-Zn/folpet, pro chloraz-Zn, and prochloraz-Mn (Table 1).
Prochloraz-Zn and prochloraz-Mn, whether alone or in combination with folpet, were the most effective fungicides in inhibiting
C. acutatum in vitro. A twofold to three 
Table 1. The effective dose of various fungicides causing 50% inhibition (ED50) of
Colletotrichum acutatum in vitro Fungicide ED50(µg/ml) Folpet 30.455 ± 5.6Captan 12.225 ± 2.3Propiconazole 0.199 ± 0.05Difenoconazole 0.156 ± 0.05
Prochloraz-Zn/Folpet 0.053 ± 0.012Prochloraz-Zn 0.077 ± 0.023Prochloraz-Mn 0.054 ± 0.017 
Fig. 1. Effect of various fungicides on control of Colletotrichum acutatum in naturally infected strawberry runners. Infected 1.5-cm-long segments were treated with the fungicides captan (2.5 g/liter), prochloraz-Zn (1 g/liter), folpet (4 g/liter), combined prochloraz-Zn (1 g/liter) and folpet (4 g/liter), and water (control), then plated to determine percent viability of C. acutatum in segments.
Vertical lines in the graph denote SE (standard error) for each sampling date. 
Plant Disease / July 1997  751 fold concentration of the -azole fungicides and an approximately 200- to 500-fold concentration of captan and folpet were required for 50% fungal-growth inhibition relative to that required of the prochloraz fungicides (Table 1).
Control of C. acutatum in infected strawberry runners. Results obtained in naturally infected runners resembled those from the in vitro experiments (Fig. 1).
Captan and folpet had little or no effect on control of C. acutatum. However, survival of the fungus in runners was significantly reduced by prochloraz-Zn and the com bined prochloraz-Zn/folpet fungicides as compared to the other treatments and the non-treated control during the course of the entire experiment (Fig. 1). After 12 days, recovery of C. acutatum from runners treated with prochloraz-Zn reached 60%, which was significantly lower than that observed with the combined prochloraz
Zn/folpet fungicide and other treatments, including the water control (90 to 100% infection).
Control of C. acutatum in infected strawberry transplants in the green house. Mortality of transplants caused by
C. acutatum was significantly reduced by all fungicides and by the heat treatment relative to the non-treated control (Table 2). Prochloraz-Zn was the most effective treatment (85.6% control), but did not differ significantly from the heat treatment (75.6% control). Prochloraz-Zn/folpet (50.6% control), propiconazole (33.8% control), and difenoconazole (28.8% con trol) were less effective than prochloraz-Zn and the heat treatment in reducing plant mortality (Table 2). It should be noted that the prochloraz fungicides, difenoconazole, and propiconazole caused slight phytotox icity of the treated plants which was mani fested by mild stunting and scorching of leaves.
Control of C. acutatum in field trans plants. Mortality caused by C. acutatum in naturally infected strawberry transplants was significantly reduced by all fungicide treatments as compared to the non-treated control during both 1995 and 1996 field trials (Table 3). Prochloraz-Mn and pro chloraz-Zn alone were the most effective in reducing transplant mortality among the tested fungicides. Reduction of transplant mortality in 1995 using prochloraz-Mn was 93.3%, whereas reduction in mortality in 1996 for prochloraz-Mn (86.8%) and pro chloraz-Zn (93.1%) did not differ signifi cantly. Prochloraz-Zn/folpet, propicona zole, and difenoconazole were less effec tive than prochloraz alone (Table 3). How ever in 1995, transplant mortality was re duced by 66.7 and 37.7% using prochloraz
Zn/folpet and propiconazole, respectively.
Similarly, in 1996, transplant mortality was reduced by 52.9 and 29.1% using pro chloraz-Zn/folpet and difenoconazole, respectively. As with the greenhouse ex periments, the prochloraz fungicides, difenoconazole, and propiconazole were slightly phytotoxic.DISCUSSION
High concentrations of the protectant fungicides captan and folpet were not ef fective in vitro and failed to control the disease in naturally infected runners. Their use in further greenhouse and field experi ments was therefore not considered. The -azole fungicides, propiconazole and difenoconazole, were effective in reducing in vitro growth of C. acutatum. However, prochloraz in two forms, prochloraz-Zn and prochloraz-Mn, as well as a combined prochloraz-Zn/folpet formulation, were two fold to threefold more effective in inhibit ing in vitro growth of the pathogen. This prompted us to proceed with in vivo stud ies using the -azole and prochloraz fungi cides for control of C. acutatum in natu rally infected plant material. In greenhouse and field studies, prochloraz-Mn and pro chloraz-Zn alone were highly effective in controlling the pathogen in naturally in fected plant material, as was the pro chloraz-Zn/folpet formulation, albeit to a lesser extent. It should be noted that the combined treatment was also less effective than prochloraz alone in disease control under laboratory conditions, despite the fact that the prochloraz concentration in the combined formulation was equivalent to that of prochloraz alone. This may be attributed to an antagonistic effect of folpet in the formulation which interfered with the fungicidal activity of prochloraz. Al though propiconazole has been reported to inhibit C. fragariae in vitro (11), it was not sufficiently effective in our experiments.
Prochloraz was effective in controlling strawberry anthracnose under all tested conditions, however, this fungicide under the current formulation had a residual taste effect on strawberries (S. Freeman and S. Dotan, unpublished data). Therefore, pro chloraz should be thoroughly tested before widespread use in strawberry fruiting fields. Additional caution should be taken regarding resistance or tolerance of C. acutatum and other species of Colle totrichum to prochloraz in particular, and to other fungicides in general. Isolates of
C. kahawae, which are usually highly sen sitive to prochloraz, have been shown to acquire tolerance to this fungicide in cul ture (9). Similarly, isolates of C. acutatum from various hosts (including strawberry) were resistant to benzimidazole fungicides as compared to the sensitivity of C. gloeosporioides isolates (1).
A standard heat treatment (5 min at 49°C) of bare-rooted transplants for nurs ery use is practiced in the United States for the control of foliar nematodes and an thracnose of strawberry (13). In this study the same heat treatment had no visible detrimental effect on transplants and was very effective in reducing percent mortality caused by C. acutatum (Table 2). However, heat treatment may be detrimental to plant vigor and should not be used if transplants are destined for production fields (13).
Although heat treatment may be a wel come alternative to chemical fungicides for protective and curative measures of straw berry anthracnose, its long-term effect on plant development and yield needs to be addressed. On the other hand, nonchemical means of control may minimize the ap pearance of fungicide-tolerant or resistant fungal pathogenic strains.
The establishment of transplants in the field is one of the most critical stages of strawberry production in Israel. Plants that are killed by strawberry anthracnose during 
Table 2. Effect of various fungicides and a heat treatment on percent mortality of strawberry plants caused by Colletotrichum acutatum in the greenhouse Treatmenta Mortalityb (%) Control 80.0Difenoconazole 57.2Propiconazole 53.5Prochloraz-Zn/Folpet 39.5Heat 19.5Prochloraz-Zn 11.5
LSDc 13.5 a Plants were immersed for 10 min in the following treatments: control (tap water), prochloraz-Zn (1 g/liter), combined pro chloraz-Zn (1 g/liter) and folpet (4 g/liter), difenoconazole (2.5 g/liter), propiconazole (2.5 g/liter), and heated water (49°C for 5 min).
 b Means are the average plant mortality of four experiments containing 25 plants each per treatment. Mortality was assessed 6 weeks after planting.
 c Least significant difference (LSD), calculated according to Fisher’s protected test, at P < 0.05.
Table 3. Percent mortalitya of strawberry transplants caused by Colletotrichum acutatum in the field during the years 1995 and 1996 Mortality (%)c Treatmentb 1995 1996 Control 70.3 75.6ProchlorazZn/Folpet 23.4 35.6 Prochloraz-Zn          … 5.2Prochloraz-Mn 4.7 10.0Propiconazole 43.8          …Difenoconazole          … 53.6
LSDd 22.8 13.6 a Mortality was assessed 34 (1995) and 21 (1996) days after transplanting.
 b Transplants were dipped for 10 min in the following treatments: control (tap water), prochloraz-Mn (1 g/liter), prochloraz-Zn (1 g/liter), combined prochloraz-Zn (1 g/liter) and folpet (4 g/liter), difenoconazole (2.5 g/liter), and propiconazole (2.5 g/liter).
 c Means are the average transplant mortality of four replicates containing 32 plants each (1995), and five replicates containing 50 plants each (1996), per treatment.
 d Least significant difference, calculated according to Fisher’s protected test, at P < 0.05.
 752  Plant Disease / Vol. 81 No. 7 the first 3 to 4 weeks following transplan tation are routinely replaced by new trans plants. Fruit production is thereby delayed, resulting in extensive loss of revenue by fruit not accessing the European markets before January. As a result, single-dip pro chloraz treatments, both at the nursery establishment and especially at the trans plant stages, have become routine practice for all farmers in Israel, regardless of whether or not plants have visible anthrac nose symptoms. Strawberry root necrosis caused by C. acutatum resulting in stunt ing, chlorosis, and plant mortality has be come an increasing problem in Israel (3).
The dip treatments are therefore likely to expose infected root tissues to prochloraz and contribute to reduction of disease inci dence. In addition, single-dip treatments have minimal impact on the environment as entire fields are not sprayed after plant ing. Although mild prochloraz phytotoxic ity was observed, crop yield does not ap pear to be affected.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by grant No. 132-0967-96 from the Chief Scientist, Israel Min istry of Agriculture, and grant No. 132-0922-96 from the Vegetable Growers Association, awarded to S. Freeman. We thank D. Shtienberg for critical review of this manuscript.
LITERATURE CITED  1. Bernstein, B., Zehr, E. I., Dean, R. A., and 
Shabi, E. 1995. Characteristics of Colle totrichum from peach, apple, pecan, and other hosts. Plant Dis. 79:478-482.
  2. Freeman, S. 1996. Occurrence and identifica tion of Colletotrichum acutatum responsible for strawberry anthracnose in Israel. (Abstr.).Phytoparasitica 24:137.
  3. Freeman, S., and Katan, T. 1997. Identifica tion of Colletotrichum species responsible for anthracnose and root necrosis of strawberry in
Israel. Phytopathology. In press.
  4. Freeman, S., Pham, M., and Rodriguez, R. J. 1993. Molecular genotyping of Colle totrichum species based on arbitrarily primed
PCR, A+T-rich DNA, and nuclear DNA analyses. Exp. Mycol. 17:309-322.
  5. Freeman, S., and Rodriguez, R. J. 1995. Dif ferentiation of Colletotrichum species re sponsible for anthacnose of strawberry by arbitrarily primed PCR. Mycol. Res. 99:901-905.
  6. Henz, G. P., Boiteux, L. S., and Lopes, C. A. 1992. Outbreak of strawberry anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum acutatum in centralBrazil. Plant Dis. 76:212.
  7. Howard, C. M., Maas, J. L., Chandler C. K., and Albregts, E. E. 1992. Anthracnose of strawberry caused by the Colleto trichum complex in Florida. Plant Dis. 76:976-981.
  8. Levy, Y., Benderly, M., Cohen, Y., Gisi, U., and Bassand, D. 1986. The joint action of fungicides in mixtures: comparison of two methods for synergy calculation. EPPO Bull. 16:651-657.
  9. Mwang’ombe, A. W. 1994. Tolerance in iso lates of Colletotrichum coffeanum to pro chloraz-Mn in Kenya. J. Phytopathol. 140:114-122.
  10. Smith, B. J. 1986. First report of Colle totrichum acutatum on strawberry in the
United States. Plant Dis. 70:1074.
  11. Smith, B. J., and Black, L. L. 1990. Morpho logical, cultural, and pathogenic variation among Colletotrichum species isolated from strawberry. Plant Dis. 74:69-76.
  12. Smith, B. J., and Black, L. L. 1993. In vitro activity of fungicides against Colletotrichum fragariae. ACTA Hortic. 348:509-512.
  13. Strand, L. L. 1994. Integrated pest manage ment for strawberries. University of Califor nia, Publication 3351, Oakland, CA, USA.  14. Tu, J. C. 1985. An improved Mathur’s me dium for growth, sporulation and germination of spores of Colletotrichum lindemuthianum.Microbios 44:87-93.
  15. Washington, W. S., Shanmuganathan, N., and
Forbes, C. 1992. Fungicide control of straw berry fruit rots, and the field occurrence of re sistance of Botrytis cinerea to iprodione, benomyl and dichlofluanid. Crop Prot. 11:355-360. 