
Effect of Phosphite on Tomato and Pepper Plants and on Susceptibility of Pepper to Phytophthora Root and Crown Rot in Hydroponic Culture 
Plant Disease / October 1998  1165 
Effect of Phosphite on Tomato and Pepper Plants and on Susceptibility of Pepper to Phytophthora Root and Crown Rot in Hydroponic Culture 
H. Förster, J. E. Adaskaveg, D. H. Kim, and M. E. Stanghellini, Department of Plant Pathology, University ofCalifornia, Riverside 92521 
Phosphorus nutrition of plants is pro vided in various forms of phosphates, the salts of phosphoric acid. Although phos phates occur naturally in soil, their poor availability (8) necessitates soil amend ment with commercial fertilizers to supply phosphorus nutrition. Phosphonates are reduced phosphorus compounds with se lective effectiveness against oomycetous fungi (4). The question has been raised whether phosphonates can replace phos phates as a source of phosphorus with the additional benefit of disease control (6).
Currently, there are several commercial products that contain phosphonate (e.g., phosphite, the salt of phosphorous acid) as the phosphorus carrier. These products are registered as supplemental soil and foliar fertilizers for annual and perennial crops.
The goal of our study was to investigate and quantify plant growth responses fol lowing root application of selected phos phorus formulations and to determine their effects on plant susceptibility to Phytoph thora root rot. Specifically, we wanted to determine if phosphorous acid or its salt, phosphite, can substitute for phosphate fertilization and support healthy plant de velopment of tomato (Lycopersicon escu lentum L.) and green pepper (Capsicum annuum L.). Additionally, pepper plants that were grown with different phosphorus fertilizers were evaluated for disease inci dence and severity of Phytophthora root and crown rot caused by Phytophthora capsici. A nutrient-film hydroponic culture system was selected for our investigations.
Hydroponic culture provides plant roots with nutrients from defined solutions that contain less diverse and probably smaller populations of microorganisms than do soil systems (16). This may reduce the poten tial microbial oxidation of phosphorous acid to phosphoric acid (1). Furthermore, hydroponic systems have proven to be very useful in short-term studies for manage ment of Phytophthora capsici on pepper (15).MATERIALS AND METHODS
Hydroponic growing system for to mato and green pepper plants. Tomato (cv. Bonny Best Improved, Seminis Seed
Company, Woodland, CA) and green pepper (cv. Joe Parker) plants were grown from seed in a root cube growth medium.
For this, seeds were sown in 75 mm long plastic cylindrical culture tubes (18 mm inner diameter) that were filled with a growth medium (Smithers-Oasis, Kent,
OH) and were immersed in water. The recirculating nutrient-film hydroponic system was set up in a greenhouse on the
University of California-Riverside campus.
The system was established on eight greenhouse benches. Six 3-m-long PVC pipes, 10 cm in diameter, were placed on each greenhouse bench. Seven evenly spaced sets of three holes were made in each of the six PVC pipes, and plant cul ture tubes were inserted. Seedlings of uni form size were selected and transferred into the hydroponic system after 10 to 14 days (=day 1 of the hydroponic experi ment). After 1 week, two plants per set of three were removed to guarantee uniform ity of plants. Nutrient solutions were pumped from a 40-liter reservoir for each bench through drip irrigation hoses that were connected to one end of each PVC tube using 3.8 liter/h emitters. Solutions were collected on the opposite end through drain holes and returned to the reservoir using drip irrigation hoses. Thus, each bench corresponded to one treatment.
Air temperature, relative humidity, leaf wetness, water temperature, and water electrical conductivity for each treatment were monitored every minute using elec tronic sensors and dataloggers (Campbell
Scientific, Logan, UT). Data were summa rized daily for average, maximum, and minimum values for each sensor.
Nutrient solutions. A basic nutrient solution was made using distilled water and the following compounds: 1.5 mM
Ca(NO3)2, 2 mM CaSO4, 1.5 mM MgSO4, 43 µM EDTA-Fe, and 0.1 ml of a trace element solution (0.208 µg of BO3H3, 0.028 µg of CuSO4·5H2O, 0.560 µg of
EDTA-Fe, 0.598 µg of MnSO4·H2O, 0.025 µg of Mo7O24(NH4)6·4H2O, and 0.337 µg of ZnSO4·7H2O per ml) per liter. The seven nutrient solutions containing a final potassium content of 3 mM are described as follows: (i) 1.5 mM K2SO4 for the no phosphorus solution, (ii) 1.45 mM K2SO4 and 0.1 mM KH2PO4 for the 0.1 mM phosphate solution, (iii) 1 mM K2SO4 and 1 mM KH2PO4 for the 1 mM phosphate solution, (iv) 1.43 mM K2SO4 and 38.7 µl of technical phosphite stock solution per liter (212 g of phosphorous acid per liter buffered to pH 6.4 with KOH) for the 0.1 mM phosphite solution, (v) 0.84 mM
K2SO4 and 386 µl of technical phosphite stock solution per liter for the 1 mM phosphite solution, (vi) 0.80 mM K2SO4, 1 mM KH2PO4, and 116 µl of technical phosphite stock solution per liter for the 1 mM phosphate/0.3 mM phosphite solution, and (vii) 1 mM K2SO4 and 1 mM phosphite (supplied as Nutri-Phite P Foliar, 4-30-8, Biagro Western Sales, Inc., Visalia,
CA) for the commercial phosphite treat ment. Technical phosphite (i.e., phospho ABSTRACT
Förster, H., Adaskaveg, J. E., Kim, D. H., and Stanghellini, M. E. 1998. Effect of phosphite on tomato and pepper plants and on susceptibility of pepper to Phytophthora root and crown rot in hydroponic culture. Plant Dis. 82:1165-1170.
Tomato and pepper plants were grown hydroponically in a greenhouse using phosphate or tech nical and commercial formulations of phosphite as sources of phosphorus nutrition to determine the effects on plant development and susceptibility to Phytophthora root and crown rot.
Phosphite-treated tomato and pepper plants were deficient of phosphate and developed phospho rus-deficiency symptoms. Growth of plants (leaf area and leaf, stem, and root dry weights) that were fertilized with phosphite was significantly (P < 0.05) reduced compared with phosphate fertilized plants. In Phytophthora capsici–inoculated pepper plants, incidence of Phytophthora crown rot was significantly reduced in phosphite-treated plants compared with no phosphorus or phosphate-treated plants. Incidence of crown rot in pepper plants treated with 1 mM phosphate plus 0.3 mM phosphite was intermediate between plants treated with only phosphite (1 mM or 0.1 mM) and plants treated with phosphate (1 mM).
Additional keywords: phosphonate fungicides, phosphorous acid 
Corresponding author: J. E. AdaskavegE-mail: jim.adaskaveg@ucr.edu 
Accepted for publication 16 July 1998.
Publication no. D-1998-0817-02R © 1998 The American Phytopathological Society 1166  Plant Disease / Vol. 82 No. 10 rous acid) was supplied by Rhône-Poulenc
Ag Co. (Research Triangle Park, NC). The pH of each nutrient solution was adjusted to 5.5 using 3 N HCl. Nutrient solutions were changed twice during the tomato experiments (after 8 and 15 days) and twice during the pepper experiments (after 6 and 15 days). For this, the flow of the nutrient solutions was interrupted, the old solutions were drained from the tubes, and the nutrient reservoirs were filled with new solutions. Before continuing the experi ment, the tubes were washed with the new solutions.
Inoculation of pepper plants with P. capsici. Two procedures were used for inoculation. In the first experiment, 5 ml of a zoospore suspension (5,000 zoospores per ml) of P. capsici (isolate 6143 from green pepper plants, obtained from C. Lid dell, New Mexico State University) was added on day 16 to each seedling in the hydroponic system. In the second experi ment, a severely infected plant from the first experiment was left in the hydroponic system to serve as an inoculum source. The 0.1 mM phosphate treatment was not in oculated and served as the control. Eight plants in a single replication were used for each treatment and for each experiment.
Harvest and measurements. Tomato plants (6 plants per treatment) or pepper plants (8 plants per treatment) were har vested 23 days after transferring them into the hydroponic system. For the determina tion of leaf areas, photographs of all leaves of four individual plants were taken, scanned into the computer using the pro gram PHOTOSHOP version 4.0 (Adobe
Systems, Inc., San Jose, CA), and the total leaf area per plant was calculated using the computer program Image-Pro Plus version 1.3 (Media Cybernetics, Silver Spring,
MD). Dry weights for stems, leaves, and roots of tomato plants or shoots and roots of pepper plants were obtained after drying tissues for 2 days at 65°C. Experiments using tomato plants were repeated three times in spring and summer using single replications of six plants per treatment.
Experiments using single replications of eight pepper plants per treatment were done twice in the summer.
Disease evaluation. Disease incidence of P. capsici–inoculated green pepper plants was visually determined at the time when all inoculated control plants exhib ited Phytophthora crown rot. This occurred approximately 2 weeks after inoculation in the first experiment and 4 weeks after in oculation in the second experiment. Tissue samples from roots or lower stems were used for reisolation of P. capsici on a 
Fig. 1. Plant appearance 23 days after transferring tomato seedlings into the re-circulating hydroponic system. Treatments shown are: (A) no-phosphorus control, (B) commercial phosphite (1 mM), (C) technical phosphite (1 mM), and (D) phosphate (1 mM). Photographs are approximately one-tenth actual size. 
Plant Disease / October 1998  1167 modified Kannwischer and Mitchell (5) medium (cornmeal agar containing 5 µg of pimaricin, 50 µg of rifampicin, 100 µg of ampicillin, 100 µg of PCNB, and 50 µg of hymexazol per ml).
Phosphate analysis. For both tomato and pepper, samples were ground with mortar and pestle and passed through a 0.417-mm sieve. Phosphate analysis of the nutrient solutions also was done before and after each nutrient solution change for the tomato experiments. Phosphate analyses were conducted by the DANR Analytical
Laboratory (University of California,Davis). 
Statistical analysis. For tomato growth parameters, three experiments were con ducted, and the means of six plants per treatment per experiment were treated as replications in the statistical analysis. For leaf areas, data were available for only two experiments. For statistical analysis of phosphate concentrations of tomato plants, the dried leaf samples of the six plants used in the single replication of each treatment were combined, resulting in one composite leaf sample for each treatment of the three experiments. Statistical analy sis of disease incidence of pepper plants was based on the means of eight plants from each of two experiments. Dry weights of pepper shoots were determined in only the second experiment. The mean dry weight of eight shoots per treatment was calculated, and no statistical analysis was performed. For phosphate analysis of pep per plants, dried shoot tissue of eight plants from the second experiment was combined, and no statistical analysis was conducted.
Statistical analysis of phosphate levels before and after changing each nutrient solution was based on four samples, two each from two experiments. Data were analyzed using analysis of variance proce dures, and multiple comparisons of means were performed using least significant difference (LSD) procedures of SAS 6.10 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). RESULTS
Growth responses of tomato plants grown with different phosphorus fertil izers. All plants in treatments with phosphite alone (technical or commercial grades of phosphite) exhibited foliar symptoms typical of phosphorus deficiency that were identical to symptoms of plants grown without phosphorus in the control treatment (Fig. 1). Foliar symptoms in cluded darker green leaves and the accu mulation of reddish to purplish (anthocyanin) pigments on the lower leaf surface.
Plant growth using phosphate as the only phosphorus source was significantly increased compared with the no-phospho rus control or plants supplied with phosphite alone (Figs. 1 and 2). There was a significant difference in stem dry weights between the two phosphate levels (0.1 mM or 1 mM), and a trend toward higher leaf and root dry weights as well as leaf area was observed for the 0.1 mM phosphate 
Fig. 2. Effect of different phosphorus sources on growth of tomato plants grown in a recirculating nutrient-film hydroponic system. Plants were harvested 23 days after transplanting seedlings into the hydroponic systems. (A) Leaf area, (B) leaf dry weights, (C) stem dry weights, and (D) root dry weights per plant were measured. Data are the average of six plants from each of three experiments conducted during the spring and summer. Bars with the same letter are not significantly different based on analysis of variance and least significant difference (LSD) mean separation (P > 0.05). 1168  Plant Disease / Vol. 82 No. 10 treatment compared with the 1 mM phos phate treatment. The combined 1 mM phosphate/0.3 mM phosphorous acid treat ment increased tomato leaf area signifi cantly compared with all other treatments, and a trend was observed for higher leaf dry weight. For all phosphate treatments, values for leaf areas and dry weights of leaves, roots, and stems were approxi mately two- to fivefold higher compared with the phosphite and no-phosphorus control treatments (Fig. 2A to D). Plants that were fertilized with phosphite (0.1 or 1 mM) had leaf areas and dry weights of leaf, stem, and root tissue similar to the no phosphorus control (Fig. 2A to D). 
The root:shoot ratio (based on dry weights), with an average value of 0.25, was highest for the no-phosphorus treat ment compared with the other treatments.
The various phosphorus fertilizers (phos phate or phosphite) decreased relative root:shoot growth between 57.5 and 45.5% compared with the no-phosphorus treat ment.
Average and maximum/minimum envi ronmental parameters for the three experi ments were: 22.3°C, 27.9/17.9°C air tem perature; 76.5%, 86.7/60% relative humidity; 23.5°C, 28.3/20.1°C water tem perature; and 1.41 mS/cm, 1.9/1.1 mS/cm temperature-corrected electrical conduc tivity.
Growth responses of pepper plants grown with different phosphorus fertil izers. Growth responses of pepper were similar to those of tomato plants, and dif ferences were observed between the phos phate and phosphite or no-phosphorus treatments. Shoot dry weights averaged 4,626.3 ± 2,124.9 mg, 332.4 ± 205.9 mg, and 190.7 ± 91.5 mg per plant for phos phate- and phosphate/phosphite-treated plants, phosphite-treated, and no phospho rus-treated plants, respectively. Root dry weights averaged 860.8 ± 608.9 mg, 75.2 ± 93.0 mg, and 69.9 ± 51.9 mg per plant for phosphate- and phosphate/phosphite treated plants, phosphite-treated, and no phosphorus-treated plants, respectively. No difference was observed in shoot or root dry weights for plants treated with the commercial form of phosphite compared with plants treated without phosphorus.
Average and maximum/minimum envi ronmental parameters for both pepper ex periments were: 23.3°C, 28.6/19.5°C air temperature; 75.5%, 85.5/58.4% relative humidity; 25.1°C, 28.2/22.6°C water tem perature; and 1.51 mS/cm, 1.76/1.47 mS/cm temperature-corrected electrical conductivity.
Disease evaluation of P. capsici–in oculated pepper plants. Disease symp toms on pepper caused by P. capsici con sisted of discolored roots and girdling dark lesions on the hypocotyls (i.e., crown rot) that generally resulted in the death of the plant. Crown rot incidence was signifi cantly lower (P < 0.05) in plants supplied with either phosphite formulation as a phosphorus source compared with the no phosphorus or phosphate-treated plants (Fig. 3). Plants that were fertilized with a phosphate (1 mM)/phosphite (0.3 mM) combination exhibited an intermediate response between the high susceptibility of phosphate- and no phosphorus-treated plants and the low disease incidence ob served among plants treated with any for mulation of phosphite (Fig. 3). Between 2 and 4 weeks after inoculation in both ex periments, plants treated with no phosphorus died, and disease incidence generally increased in both phosphate- and phosphite-treated plants. Most of the plants treated with the commercial form of phos phorous acid, however, still appeared healthy after 4 weeks. Root/lower stem (below crown) isolations resulted in the consistent recovery of P. capsici from all treatments except the noninoculated 0.1 mM phosphate-treated plants.
Phosphate concentrations in nutrient solutions. There was no difference in phosphate concentration between the no phosphorus and phosphite treatments (Table 1). Phosphate concentrations in the 1 mM phosphate or 1 mM phosphate/0.3 mM phosphite treatments were highest and were approximately 10-fold higher com pared with the 0.1 mM phosphate solution.
No significant change (P > 0.05) in phos phate concentration was found in solutions that had circulated for 6 to 8 days in the hydroponic system compared with freshly prepared solutions.
Phosphate concentrations in tomato and green pepper plants. Phosphate con centrations in tomato leaves were signifi cantly (P < 0.05) higher for the phosphate treated plants than for leaves in all other treatments (Table 1). Phosphate concentra tions in leaves of plants treated with the 
Table 1. Phosphate concentrations (mg/ml) in tomato and pepper plants and in nutrient solutions of the hydroponic culture system 
Tomato Pepper Nutrient solutionsz 
Treatmentw leavesx shootsy Fresh Old 
No phosphorus 753.3 d 475.0 0.2 d 0.3 b 1 mM commercial formulation of phosphite 2,940.0 c 1,953.3 0.3 d 0.5 b 1 mM phosphite 1,616.7 cd 2,203.3 0.4 d 0.6 b 0.1 mM phosphite 883.3 d 1,146.7 0.1 d 0.3 b 1 mM phosphate 7,123.3 a 3,976.7 31.4 a 30.5 a 0.1 mM phosphate 4,930.0 b ND 3.5 c 2.4 b 1 mM phosphate + 0.3 mM phosphite 5,380.0 b 3,266.7 27.7 b 31.4 a w Treatment means followed by the same letter are not significantly different based on analysis of variance (ANOVA) and least significant difference (LSD) test (P > 0.05).
x Means of one leaf sample from each of four tomato experiments.
y Means of eight shoots (one replication) per treatment from the second experiment. Phosphate analysis of the 0.1 mM phosphate treatment of peppers was not done (ND).
z Means of four samples from four experiments.
Fig. 3. Effect of different phosphorus sources on the incidence of Phytophthora root and crown rot of green pepper plants grown in a recirculating nutrient-film hydroponic system. Plants were inoculated with Phytophthora capsici and evaluated when all inoculated control (no phosphorus) plants had crown rot. The 0.1 mM phosphate treatment was not inoculated. Data are the average of two experiments (replications) representing the means of eight plants per experiment. Bars with the same letter are not significantly different based on analysis of variance and least significant difference (LSD) mean separation (P > 0.05). 
Plant Disease / October 1998  1169 commercial formulation of phosphite were significantly higher than those of the no phosphorus-treated and the 0.1 mM phosphite-treated plants. The amount of root tissue available for phosphite-treated and no-phosphorus-treated plants generally was not sufficient for a phosphate analysis, and therefore root analyses were not done.
Similar results for phosphate concentra tions were found for the pepper plants (Table 1).DISCUSSION
One of the objectives of this research was to evaluate the effect of phosphorous acid formulations on plant development compared with phosphate treatments. Our results demonstrated that phosphite-treated tomato and pepper plants were deficient in phosphate and developed phosphorus-defi ciency symptoms when grown hydroponi cally from seedlings to early plant devel opment (approximately 3 weeks). Growth of plants that were fertilized with phospho rous acid or its commercial form (Nutri
Phite) was much reduced compared with growth of plants supplemented with phos phate. This is in agreement with previous findings using potted plants (7). Severe phosphorus starvation was also evident in the no-phosphorus control plants. In our study, growth parameters of plants growing in 0.1 mM phosphate were either higher or not significantly different from plants growing in 1 mM phosphate. Wilcox (17) indicated that phosphorus levels in whole plant tops were 3,500 µg/g for an adequate nutrient concentration and 2,800 µg/g in deficient tomato seedlings 24 to 31 days after emergence. In our study, the 1.0 mM phosphate treatment had a concentration of over 7,000 µg/g (Table 1). Although nutri ent toxicity of phosphorus and other ma cronutrients is rare, Bennett (2) indicated that these plant nutrients, if taken up in excess, will often cause imbalances with other nutrients and will result in poor plant growth. Thus, the high levels of phosphate in plants grown in the 1.0 mM phosphate treatment may explain significantly re duced stem dry weights and leaf area, as well as lower leaf and root dry weights compared with plants grown in the 0.1 mM phosphate treatment.
Evaluating the effect of combined phos phate/phosphite nutrition, Carswell et al.
(3) found that the addition of phosphite (1.5 to 10 mM) to phosphate-limited Bras sica nigra seedlings reduced plant growth, whereas with phosphate-sufficient plants only the 10 mM phosphite levels caused such a reduction. In addition, while root:shoot ratios of phosphate-stressed plants were typically high (3,11,13), phosphite supplementation decreased the root:shoot ratio to about 40% of control values. These effects were explained by
Carswell et al. (3) as a disruption of the phosphate-starvation response by phos phonates in which the phosphate-limited plants function as though they are phos phorus-sufficient. In our study, root:shoot ratios of tomato plants were also much lower for the phosphorous acid-fertilized plants compared with the no-phosphorus plants, indicating similar effects on phos phate metabolism. In our study, however, a combined 1 mM phosphate/0.3 mM phos phorous acid treatment increased leaf area significantly in two experiments where this parameter was measured, and a trend was observed for greater leaf dry weight com pared with phosphate treatment alone in three experiments. This finding might ex plain the registered label of commercial formulations of phosphite as supplemental fertilizers for improved plant growth and increased crop yield. Additional studies are needed to evaluate possible interactions between phosphite and phosphate fertiliz ers.
Phosphorous acid is readily taken up by the plant and is xylem- and phloem-mobile (10). Using ion chromatography for phos phorous acid quantification, Ouimette and
Coffey (10) demonstrated that phospho nates appear to be quite stable in avocado plants, persisting in this form for at least several months. Similarly, Robertson and
Boyer (12) reported a biological inertness of organic and inorganic phosphites. In our experiments, phosphate concentrations of tomato plants treated with technical phosphite did not differ statistically from those of the no-phosphorus control plants.
Phosphate levels in the solutions were not significantly different (P > 0.05) when freshly made or after 1 week in the recir culating hydroponic system, supporting previous work that in aqueous solutions, molecular oxygen does not readily oxidize phosphonates (12). A general trend for higher phosphate levels, however, was observed in the 1.0 mM phosphite solu tions compared with the no-phosphorus treatment. For fresh or old solutions, measurable levels of phosphate in the no phosphorus and the 1 mM phosphite treat ments ranged from 0.2 to 0.6 µg/ml, re spectively. Contamination could have occurred from the salts used for the basic nutrient solution. In plants treated with a commercial formulation of phosphite, phosphate concentrations were signifi cantly above those of the no-phosphorus treated plants. This increase could be ex plained by the slightly increased phosphate levels in the nutrient solution. Decreased phosphate concentrations in plant tissue of the 1 mM phosphate/0.3 mM phosphite treated plants relative to the 1 mM phos phate treated plants is in agreement with previous studies that showed that growth of phosphate-sufficient plants in the pres ence of phosphite caused a reduction in root and leaf phosphate levels (3).
The effect of phosphorus compounds on disease control was studied using P. cap sici–inoculated pepper plants. Plants grown with both formulations of phosphorous acid had significantly less Phytophthora crown rot compared with the no-phospho rus or phosphate-treated plants. This ob servation supports a number of studies dealing with phosphonates as antifungal compounds against oomycetous fungi (9,14). Although P. capsici was isolated from plants treated with the commercial formulation of phosphite, disease symp toms were not observed in most of the plants over the experimental period of 4 weeks. Therefore, the commercial form of phosphorous acid (Nutri-Phite) had addi tional benefits in reducing Phytophthora root rot compared with technical phosphorous acid. The reason for this is unknown.
However, undeclared ingredients in the commercial formulation may be responsible.
This is the first report that demonstrated that technical and commercial formulations of phosphite significantly reduced the inci dence of Phytophthora root and crown rot of pepper but did not provide sufficient phosphorus nutrition to tomato and pepper plants when used as sole sources of phos phorus in a recirculating hydroponic sys tem.ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank K. Conn for supplying tomato seeds, 
N. Goldberg for supplying pepper seeds, C. Lid dell for providing an isolate of P. capsici, and C. Huang for her excellent technical assistance.
LITERATURE CITED  1. Adams, F., and Conrad, J. P. 1953. Transition of phosphite to phosphate in soils. Soil Sci. 75:361-371.  2. Bennett, W. F. 1993. Plant nutrient utilization and diagnostic plant symptoms. Pages 1-7 in:
Nutrient Deficiencies and Toxicities in Crop
Plants. W. Bennett, ed. American Phytopa thological Society, St. Paul, MN.  3. Carswell, C., Grant, B. R., Theodorou, M. E.,
Harris, J., Niere, J. O., and Plaxton, W. C. 1996. The fungicide phosphonate disrupts the phosphate-starvation response in Brassica ni gra seedlings. Plant Physiol. 110:105-110.  4. Coffey, M. D., and Ouimette, D. G. 1989.
Phosphonates: Antifungal compounds against oomycetes. Pages 107-129 in: Nitrogen,
Phosphorus and Sulphur Utilization by Fungi. Symposium of the British Mycological Soci ety, April 1988. L. Boddy, R. Marchant and
D. J. Reed, eds. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.  5. Kannwischer, M. E., and Mitchell, D. J. 1978.
The influence of a fungicide on the epidemi ology of black shank of tobacco. Phytopa thology 68:1760-1765.  6. Lovatt, C. J. 1990. A definitive test to deter mine whether phosphite fertilization can re place phosphate fertilization to supply P in the metabolism of ‘Hass’ on ‘Duke 7’. Calif. Avocado Soc. Yearb. 74:61-64.  7. MacIntire, W. H., Winterberg, S. H., Hardin,
L. J., Sterges, A. J., and Clements, L. B. 1950.
Fertilizer evaluation of certain phosphorus, phosphorous, and phosphoric materials by means of pot cultures. Agron. J. 42:543-549.  8. Mengel, K., and Kirkby, E. A. 1987. Princi ples of Plant Nutrition. International Potash
Institute, Worblaufen-Bern, Switzerland.  9. Ouimette, D. G., and Coffey, M. D. 1989.
Phosphonate levels in avocado (Persea americana) seedlings and soil following treatment with fosetyl-Al or potassium phos phonate. Plant Dis. 73:212-215. 1170  Plant Disease / Vol. 82 No. 10  10. Ouimette, D. G., and Coffey, M. D. 1990.
Symplastic entry and phloem translocation of phosphonate. Pestic. Biochem. Physiol. 38:18-25.  11. Rabe, E., and Lovatt, C. J. 1986. Increased arginine biosynthesis during phosphorus defi ciency. A response to the increased ammonia content of leaves. Plant Physiol. 81:774-779.  12. Robertson, H. E., and Boyer, P. D. 1956. The biological inactivity of glucose 6-phosphite, inorganic phosphites and other phosphites.
Arch. Biochem. Biophysics 62:380-395. 13. Rychter, A. M., and Mikulska, M. 1990. The relationship between phosphate status and cyanide-resistant respiration in bean roots.Physiol. Plant. 79:663-667.  14. Smillie, R., Grant, B. R., and Guest, D. 1989.
The mode of action of phosphite: Evidence for both direct and indirect modes of action on three Phytophthora spp. in plants. Phyto pathology 79:921-926.  15. Stanghellini, M. E., Kim, D. H., Rasmussen, 
S. L., and Rorabaugh, P. A. 1996. Control of root rot of peppers caused by Phytophthora capsici with a nonionic surfactant. Plant Dis. 80:1113-1116.  16. Stanghellini, M. E., and Rasmussen, S. L. 1994. Hydroponics: A solution for zoosporic pathogens. Plant Dis. 78:1129-1138.  17. Wilcox, G. E. 1993. Tomato. Pages 137-141 in: Nutrient Deficiencies and Toxicities in
Crop Plants. W. Bennett, ed. American Phyto pathological Society, St. Paul, MN. 