
Germination and Sporulation of Colletotrichum acutatum on Symptomless Strawberry Leaves Vol. 91, No. 7, 2001 659 Epidemiology 
Germination and Sporulation of Colletotrichum acutatum on Symptomless Strawberry Leaves 
L. F. S. Leandro, M. L. Gleason, F. W. Nutter, Jr., S. N. Wegulo, and P. M. Dixon 
First, second, third, and fourth authors: Department of Plant Pathology, Iowa State University, Ames 50011; and fifth author: Department of 
Statistics, Iowa State University, Ames 50011.  
Accepted for publication 28 March 2001. ABSTRACT 
Leandro, L. F. S., Gleason, M. L., Nutter, F. W., Jr., Wegulo, S. N., and 
Dixon, P. M. 2001. Germination and sporulation of Colletotrichum acu tatum on symptomless strawberry leaves. Phytopathology 91:659-664. 
The germination and sporulation of Colletotrichum acutatum were characterized over time on strawberry leaves (cv. Tristar) and plastic coverslips incubated at 26°C under continuous wetness. Conidia ger minated within 3 h after inoculation and formed melanized appressoria with pores by 9 h after inoculation. Host penetration was not observed up to 7 days after inoculation. Production of secondary conidia on conidial and hyphal phialides began within 6 h after inoculation. Secondary conidiation was responsible for up to a threefold increase in the total number of conidia within 7 days after inoculation. Primary conidia and hyphae began to collapse 48 h after inoculation, whereas melanized appressoria remained intact. These findings suggest that appressoria and secondary conidia of C. acutatum produced on symptomless strawberry foliage may be significant sources of inoculum for fruit infections.  
Additional keywords: anthracnose, microcyclic conidiation, phyllosphere ecology.  
Anthracnose, caused by Colletotrichum acutatum J. H. 
Simmonds, is responsible for major losses in strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa Duch.) production worldwide (11,14,26). Fruit rot and flower blight are common symptoms in fruiting fields (11), whereas lesions on stolons, petioles, and leaves are particularly damaging in plant nurseries (9,10,16). C. acutatum may also cause crown rot and plant death in some regions (9,11,25).  
The pathogen is apparently introduced into production fields on infected or infested propagation material (9,14,16,18). During warm, moist periods, lesions formed on transplants produce abun dant conidia (11,26) that are splash dispersed onto flowers and fruits, resulting in new infections (26,29). However, when epi demics develop in fields where symptomless propagation material was planted, the source of initial inoculum is not clearly identi fiable (11). Eastburn and Gubler (8) suggested that the fungus is transported in infested soil attached to strawberry crowns, but the form and fate of fungal propagules from this potential inoculum source were not reported. Several other studies have suggested that C. acutatum can develop quiescent infections on strawberry plants (11,18,23), but the epidemiological role of such infections prior to colonization of fruits and senescing foliage has not been investigated.  
The histology of infection by Colletotrichum spp. has been studied thoroughly on several hosts (5,7,20,22). Conidia germi nate either by producing germ tubes and terminal appressoria or by forming sessile appressoria (4). Appressoria become melanized and develop pores from which host penetration occurs (4,20). Two types of infections can develop: (i) intracellular hemibiotrophic, in which infection vesicles or swollen hyphae form within epidermal cells, e.g., on Pinus needles (20), and (ii) subcuticular, intramural necrotrophic, where cuticular penetration is followed by hyphal proliferation within the cuticle and epidermal cell walls, but without penetration of the cell lumen, e.g., on strawberry petioles (1) and leaves (4,23). Both infection types may remain quiescent before extensive cell death, colonization, and symptom develop ment occur (3,4).  
Symptomless foliage harbors inoculum for fruit and flower infections of several Colletotrichum spp. (7,21,28). Pantidou and 
Schroeder (21), for example, showed that conidia of C. phomoides harvested from symptomless tomato leaves were able to cause infections on tomato fruit. On citrus, C. acutatum survived on leaves as quiescent appressoria (28,30). These appressoria could be stimulated to germinate directly and produce secondary conidia that served as inoculum for flower infections. It has also been suggested that quiescent infections on strawberry leaves can provide inoculum for strawberry anthracnose epidemics (23). 
However, the potential for inoculum production on symptomless strawberry leaves has not been examined. A better understanding of the ecology of C. acutatum on strawberry foliage prior to the development of fruit rot symptoms may provide insights to im prove management of strawberry anthracnose.  
The objective of this study was to characterize and quantify germination and sporulation of C. acutatum on symptomless strawberry foliage during periods of leaf wetness. A preliminary report has been published (12).  MATERIALS AND METHODS 
Plant production and maintenance. Day-neutral strawberry crowns (cv. Tristar) were planted in 15-cm-diameter plastic pots containing a 1:2:1 mixture of peat, perlite, and soil, and grown in a greenhouse maintained at 25 ± 4°C with a 16-h photoperiod. The plants were drip irrigated and fertilized weekly with a solution of 21-5-20 fertilizer (400 ppm N; Miracle Gro Excel, Marysville, 
OH). For each experiment, newly unfurled leaves were tagged 7 to 10 days before sampling to insure uniformity of leaf age at sampling.  
Inoculum production. Isolate HF-ac-98 of C. acutatum was obtained from an infected strawberry fruit collected at the Iowa 
State University Horticulture Research Farm near Gilbert. The 
Corresponding author: M. L. Gleason; E-mail address: mgleason@iastate.edu 
Publication no. P-2001-0426-01R © 2001 The American Phytopathological Society 660 PHYTOPATHOLOGY isolate was grown on potato dextrose agar (PDA) amended with 150 ppm of streptomycin and 150 ppm of tetracycline and trans ferred to silica gel for long-term storage. All cultures used for inoculum preparation were started by depositing infested silica gel crystals on PDA plates and culturing at 26°C in darkness until conidia developed. Conidia collected from PDA cultures were seeded onto strawberry fruit agar (SFA) prepared with 200 ml of blended, pesticide-free, ripe strawberries (cv. Tristar), 20 g of agar, 3 g of CaCO3, and 800 ml of distilled water (pH 5.5 to 6.0).  
Conidial suspensions used for inoculations were prepared from 7-day-old cultures grown on SFA at 26°C in darkness. Each SFA culture plate was flooded with 9 ml of sterile deionized water (SDW) and scraped with a rubber policeman to dislodge conidia. 
The resulting conidial suspension was filtered through two layers of cheesecloth into a flask, and the conidia were washed by centrifuging twice at 3,020 × g for 2 min, discarding the super natant, and resuspending the conidial pellet in SDW each time. 
The final conidial suspension was adjusted to 5 × 105 conidia per ml for leaf inoculations and 5 × 103 conidia per ml for coverslip inoculations to obtain a similar conidial density on both surfaces.  
Leaf inoculation. Leaves were excised at the petiole base and placed in humid chambers, which were (24 × 34 × 6 cm) plastic boxes (Tri-Star Plastics, Dixon, KY) with 500 ml of SDW. Leaves were suspended above the water on wire mesh with the excised ends of the petioles inserted through the mesh into the water. 
Within an hour after sampling, the wire mesh containing the leaves was removed from each crisper and the leaves were spray inoculated with a conidial suspension by an atomizer (DeVilbiss 
Air Compressor, 571 Series, Somerset, PA). Approximately 5 ml of conidial suspension was sprayed over a 20 × 30 cm area (average application of 40 conidia per mm2). The leaves and wire mesh were returned to the crispers, which were sealed in plastic bags to maintain 100% relative humidity and incubated at 26°C in darkness.  
Four leaves were sampled arbitrarily at 0, 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 24, 36, 48, 72, 96, 120, 144, and 168 h after inoculation. Two leaf disks were excised from each leaf, one on either side of the central vein of the middle leaflet, by a 1-cm-diameter cork borer. The disks were fixed in 2% glutaraldehyde for 3 h, and cleared in saturated chloral hydrate (200 g per 20 ml of deionized water) for  5 days. After mounting the disks on a drop of Hoyer’s medium and staining with 0.1% aniline blue in lactophenol, they were ob served under a differential interference contrast microscope for conidial germination.  
The total number of germinated and ungerminated conidia was counted in each of 16 microscope fields (×500) observed on each leaf disk. These fields were selected by visually dividing a leaf disk into four quadrants and arbitrarily selecting four fields in each quadrant. A conidium was considered germinated when it had formed either a germ tube at least as long as its width, an appressorium, or a conidial phialide. Appressoria that were un melanized, melanized without an appressorial pore, or melanized with an appressorial pore were also counted. An appressorium was defined as a globose, septum-delimited structure that formed  
Fig. 1. Conidial germination of Colletotrichum acutatum on strawberry leaves in A, experiment 1 and B, experiment 2 and on coverslips in C, experiment 1 and 
D, experiment 2. Leaves were spray inoculated with a 5 × 105 conidia per ml suspension, coverslips were inoculated with 0.1-ml droplets of a 5 × 103 conidia per ml suspension, and both were incubated at 26°C in darkness. Error bars represent ±1 standard error of the mean, calculated from pooled variance among observations (N = 8) at each time and averaged for all curves. 
Vol. 91, No. 7, 2001 661 either on a hyphal tip or sessile to a conidium. Dark brown appres soria were considered melanized, and appressorial pores were identified as small, basal, hyaline openings at the center of an appressorium. Data were converted to an area basis (square milli meters) by dividing total number of conidia or appressoria in each leaf disk by the area of 16 microscope fields observed per disk. 
Eight disks were counted at each sampling time, and the experi ment was repeated once.  
Leaves inoculated as described previously were incubated for 24 h and prepared for scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Leaf disks were fixed overnight at 4°C in cacoldylate buffer (pH 7.4) containing 2% glutaraldehyde and 2% paraformaldehyde, rinsed in buffer, and processed through graded alcohols to 100%. The disks were critical point dried in a Denton Critical Point Drying 
Apparatus DCP-1 (Denton Vacuum, Inc., Moorestown, NJ), mounted on aluminum stubs, and coated with a gold-palladium alloy to a thickness of approximately 300 angstroms on a Desk II 
Cold Sputter/Etch Unit (Denton Vacuum). Microscopic observa tions were done with a JEOL (Japanese Electron Optic Labora tories, Tokyo) SEM (JSM-5800LV) at 10 kV.  
Coverslip inoculation. Conidial germination was also studied on plastic coverslips (22 × 22 mm). A 0.1-ml droplet of conidial suspension (5 × 103 conidia per ml) was deposited in the center of each of four coverslips placed on moistened filter paper in glass petri dishes. Each petri dish was sealed with Parafilm to maintain 100% relative humidity and incubated at 26°C in darkness. Cover slips were sampled at intervals similar to inoculated leaves and prepared for microscopic observation by mounting on slides and staining with a drop of 0.1% aniline blue in lactophenol. Conidial germination and appressorium development were quantified at ×250 magnification as described for leaf disks. Four coverslips were counted for each sampling time, and the experiment was repeated once.  
Assessment of host penetration. To confirm microscopic ob servations of cleared leaf disks that indicated no penetration of the epidermis by hyphae up to 168 h after inoculation, two alternative assessment methods were used. In the first method, 30 strawberry leaves were collected and placed in humid chambers at 100% RH as described previously. Each leaflet was inoculated with two 0.01-ml droplets of a suspension (1.8 × 104 conidia per ml) on each side of the leaflet midvein. The humid chambers were bagged and incubated at 26°C in darkness for 72 h. Leaves were arbitrarily sampled from the crispers and assigned to each of six treatments arranged in a 3 × 2 factorial design including (i) the method of disinfestation (surface disinfested, peeled/disinfested, and untreated), and (ii) the method used to induce senescence (freezing or not freezing leaves for 2 h after disinfestation). Ten leaves were surface-disinfested for 90 s in a mixture of 500 ml of sodium hypochlorite (0.5%) with 20 µl of Tween 20 (25%) and rinsed three times in SDW. Clear nail polish was applied to the adaxial surface of an additional 10 leaves, air dried, and peeled off to detach fungal structures from the leaf surface (30), after which the leaves were surface sterilized and rinsed as described previ ously. The remaining 10 leaves were used as untreated controls. 
From each group of 10 leaves, five were placed in sterile paper towels and frozen for 6 h to induce senescence and sporulation of 
C. acutatum (19), whereas the remaining five leaves were not frozen. The two lateral leaflets from each leaf were detached and plated, adaxial side up, onto PDA amended with streptomycin (150 ppm), tetracycline (150 ppm), and Tergitol (18 drops per liter). The plates were sealed with Parafilm and incubated for  5 days at 26°C in darkness. The number of inoculum droplets that yielded C. acutatum colonies on each leaflet was counted 5 days after inoculation. A total of 40 droplets were assessed per treatment (four droplets–five leaves–two leaflets/leaf).  
In the second assessment of host penetration, four leaves were each inoculated with two 0.02-ml drops of a 105 conidia per ml suspension of unwashed conidia and incubated in crispers for 72 h as described previously. Leaf segments containing an inoculum droplet were excised from each leaf, and 50 µm thick, transverse sections were prepared with a vibrating microtome. Leaf sections were stained with 0.1% aniline blue in lactophenol and observed under oil immersion at ×1,000. Each leaf section was evaluated for the presence of subepidermal infection structures beneath appressoria. A total of 40 leaf sections (five sections–two drop lets–four leaves), each containing five or more appressoria, were observed, and the experiment was repeated once.  
Data analysis. Because most population growth trends reached an apparent asymptote at 48 h, counts of total conidia, total appressoria, and total appressoria with pores were averaged over a period of 48 to 168 h to represent the final population size, and the corresponding standard errors of the mean were calculated. Initial population size (primary conidia) was determined by total number of conidia 3 h after inoculation.  RESULTS 
Germination process. Conidia began to germinate on leaves and coverslips within 3 h after inoculation (Fig. 1). Most conidia developed a central transverse septum and germinated on one or both ends by forming a germination tube or a sessile appres sorium. Some conidia, however, did not become septate. Appres soria also developed at the distal ends of the elongated germi nation tubes that were sometimes branched. Appressoria were 
Fig. 2. Secondary conidiation of Colletotrichum acutatum on strawberry leaves 24 h after inoculation observed by scanning electron microscopy. A,
Primary conidium with secondary conidium (arrow) attached to conidial phialide. Notice mucilage surrounding primary conidium and appressorium (right). B, Primary conidium with secondary conidium (central arrow) detaching from hypha. Detached secondary conidia (upper left) may have been produced by partially visible conidial phialide (left arrow). 662 PHYTOPATHOLOGY initially hyaline, then became melanized and developed basal pores on both leaves and coverslips. Many sessile appressoria did not become melanized but instead formed a germination tube at the tip where another appressorium developed and became melan ized. By 48 h after inoculation, the primary conidia (used to inoculate plants) had begun to collapse and disintegrate, while several hyphal segments and conidial cells had become melanized.  
Secondary conidia were produced by primary conidia that germinated with phialides instead of germination tubes (Fig. 2) and by phialides forming on elongated germination tubes. Conidial phialides were observed on nonseptate primary conidia, and on septate primary conidia that had developed a germination tube or appressorium on the opposite end. Secondary conidia were first observed on conidial phialides 9 and 6 h after inoculation in experiments 1 and 2, respectively, and on hyphal phialides 24 h after inoculation. Both conidial and hyphal phialides produced multiple secondary conidia that detached and accumulated near the phialides.  
Preliminary experiments indicated that a large proportion of conidia were washed off leaf disks immediately (0 h) after inocu lation due to immersion of the disks in fixative (data not shown). 
Conidial wash off was negligible at >3 h after inoculation, because germinated conidia were more firmly attached to the leaves. This artifact explains why the number of ungerminated conidia observed on leaves was lower at 0 h than at 3 h after inoculation (Fig. 1A and B). Consequently, we used the total number of conidia at 3 h as an estimate of the number of primary conidia (Table 1). After the initial increase, the number of unger minated conidia on leaves decreased to a minimum 9 h after inoculation, when 88 and 95% germination were observed in experiments 1 and 2, respectively. The increase in number of ungerminated conidia observed after this time, and the consequent increase in total conidia, resulted from the production of second dary conidia on the leaf surface. No superficial evidence of infec tion (e.g., tissue discoloration, acervuli) was observed.  
In the coverslip experiments, conidia germinated and formed structures similar to those described on leaves (Fig. 1C and D). 
However, fungal behavior was more variable between sampling times and between the two experiments. Germination began with in 3 h after inoculation in experiment 1 but between 9 and 12 h after inoculation in experiment 2.  
Appressorium development. In both leaf experiments, the number of initially unmelanized appressoria on leaf surfaces de creased beginning 6 h after inoculation as melanization occurred (Fig. 3A and B). Appressorial pores were first observed at ap proximately the same time that melanization began. The number of appressoria with pores increased over time, and most had pores after 18 and 36 h in experiments 1 and 2, respectively. Between  48 and 168 h after inoculation, an average of 60% of the total appressoria on leaves developed appressorial pores (Table 1). On coverslips, appressoria became melanized and formed pores, but a higher number of appressoria remained unmelanized relative to total appressoria than on leaves (Fig. 3C and D).  
Host penetration. Presence of intra- or intercellular infection structures on cleared leaf disks was not detected. In the surface disinfestation experiments, unfrozen leaves remained green throughout the experiment, except for some localized browning on leaves from the surface-disinfested or peeled/disinfested treat ments, perhaps in response to wounding. All frozen leaves were uniformly brown, a result of senescence induced by freezing. On unfrozen leaves, 0, 4, and 4 of 40 inoculum droplets yielded C. acutatum colonies in the untreated, surface disinfested, and peeled/ disinfested treatments, respectively. Colonies of C. acutatum, con sisting of bright orange acervular masses, developed only where tissue browning coincided with inoculated sites, but never on green leaf areas. On frozen leaves, 40, 13, and 0 of 40 inoculum droplets yielded C. acutatum colonies in the untreated, surface disinfested, and peeled/disinfested treatments, respectively. Host penetration was not detected in microscopic observations of >300 appressoria on transverse leaf sections.  DISCUSSION 
This is the first report of production of secondary conidia by C. acutatum on symptomless strawberry leaves. Secondary conidi ation, also known as microcyclic or precocious conidiation, is defined as conidiation that occurs directly after conidial germi nation with little or no mycelial growth (27). This phenomenon has been reported for several fungi (2,6,27), including other 
Colletotrichum spp. (15,24), but its occurrence in C. acutatum was previously described only in vitro (13) and on other hosts (20,22).  
We observed secondary conidiation on both leaves and cover slips, indicating that this phenomenon can occur in the absence of host penetration or other nutrient sources (17). The production of secondary conidia increased the total number of conidia on leaf and coverslip surfaces. The actual number of secondary conidia produced per unit of primary inoculum applied may have been underestimated due to wash-off of secondary conidia (data not shown). Although secondary conidiation was responsible for up to a threefold increase in the total number of conidia on leaf and coverslip surfaces, up to fivefold increases were observed in pre liminary experiments using unwashed conidia (data not shown). 
Secondary conidiation in other fungi has been associated with factors that inhibit hyphal development (27), such as nutrient deficiency (6,24,27) and high temperature stress (2,27). Further more, Lingappa and Lingappa (15) showed that the presence of germination inhibitors associated with masses of conidia of Glom erella cingulata stimulated the production of secondary conidia by this fungus. Our observations are consistent with this work, because conidial washing may have diluted germination inhibitors and thereby suppressed secondary conidiation, favoring vegetative growth. Based on these results and observations, we hypothesize that under field conditions, the contribution of secondary conidi ation to inoculum levels is influenced by the intensity and dura tion of rainfall events.  
TABLE 1. Production of secondary conidia and development of appressoria and appressorial pores on leaves and coverslips for experiments 1 and 2  Experiment Primary conidiaa  Conidiab Conidia/primary conidium  Appressoriab Appressoria with poresb Appressoria/ conidium Appressoria/ primary conidium 
Proportion of appressoria with pores 
Leaves         1 22 ± 5.8c 75 ± 18.1 3.4 ± 1.2 59 ± 16.0 37 ± 11.2 0.8 ± 0.3 2.7 ± 1.0 0.6 ± 0.3 2 52 ± 13.0 69 ± 16.7 1.3 ± 0.5 78 ± 17.5 48 ± 12.5 1.1 ± 0.4 1.5 ± 0.5 0.6 ± 0.2 
Coverslips         1 11 ± 1.6 23 ± 6.6 2.1 ± 0.6 30 ± 5.7 8 ± 4.1 1.3 ± 0.5 2.7 ± 0.6 0.3 ± 0.1 2 6 ± 1.5 11 ± 2.8 1.8 ± 0.7 12 ± 7.3 3 ± 4.6 1.1 ± 0.8 2.0 ± 1.4 0.3 ± 0.4 a  Primary conidia are the mean (N = 8) of total number of conidia 3 h after inoculation. b Conidia, appressoria, and appressoria with pores are mean counts (N = 8) of total conidia, total appressoria, and total appressoria with pores averaged over the period of 48 to 168 h. c  Standard errors of the mean. Vol. 91, No. 7, 2001 663 
Previous work has suggested that foliage may be a significant source of inoculum for fruit and flower infections by other 
Colletotrichum spp. on several hosts (7,21,28). On citrus,  
Zulfiqar et al. (30) showed that appressoria of C. acutatum were induced to germinate and form secondary conidia on leaf surfaces in response to water and flower extracts. These conidia were splash dispersed on flowers, resulting in postbloom fruit drop. In our study, we observed collapse of fungal hyphae and primary conidia within 48 h after inoculation, with only melanized ap pressoria, melanized hyphal segments, and secondary conidia remaining intact on both leaf and coverslip surfaces. These melanized structures are likely forms of pathogen survival on symptomless leaves. It is also reasonable to hypothesize that, as in citrus, appressoria can be induced to germinate and produce secondary conidia that can function as primary inoculum for strawberry fruit infections.  
C. acutatum germinated and formed melanized appressoria  with pores, as previously observed for this fungus on strawberry (1,23) and other hosts (20,22,30). We did not detect host pene tration or other evidence of quiescent infections with any of  the three methods used for this purpose. The development of appressorial pores on both leaves and coverslips could not be interpreted as evidence for host penetration. Quiescent infec- tions of C. acutatum have been detected on citrus by stripping leaf surfaces with nail polish and observing the development of acervuli on these leaves over time (30). In our experiments, this method yielded no C. acutatum colonies on leaves that were frozen to enhance acervulus development, suggesting the com plete removal of C. acutatum from leaf surfaces and the absence of quiescent infections. Senescence is required for acervular development on strawberry leaves, indicated by the develop- ment of acervuli from all inoculum droplets on frozen, un- treated leaves and their absence on green areas of unfrozen  leaves. The reduction in the number of C. acutatum colonies on frozen, surface-disinfested leaves compared with frozen, un- treated leaves suggests that this method is partially effective  in removing fungal structures on the leaves. Development of acervuli on senesced areas of a few unfrozen, peeled leaves may have resulted from incomplete appressorium removal from  these leaves. In other work, microscopic observations of straw berry leaf sections detected subcuticular infections of C. acutatum on leaves (23) and petioles (1). Differences in strawberry culti vars, C. acutatum isolates, and physiological condition of the leaves are possible explanations for differences between our results and these studies.  
Our evidence suggests that C. acutatum inoculum can survive and multiply on symptomless strawberry leaves, and that the production of secondary conidia may increase inoculum when susceptible tissue is not available. Eventually, a greater awareness of the surreptitious fungal dynamics on symptomless plants may also justify changes in currently recommended control strategies. 
Early fungicide applications, for example, might effectively reduce initial inoculum production on developing plants, thus re ducing subsequent epidemic development on fruit.  
Fig. 3. Appressorial development of Colletotrichum acutatum on strawberry leaves in A, experiment 1 and B, experiment 2 and on coverslips in C, experiment 1 and D, experiment 2. Leaves were spray inoculated with a 5 × 105 conidia per ml suspension, coverslips were inoculated with 0.1-ml droplets of a 5 × 103 conidia per ml suspension, and both were incubated at 26°C in darkness. Error bars represent ±1 standard error of the mean, calculated from pooled variance among observations (N = 8) at each time and averaged for all curves.  664 PHYTOPATHOLOGY ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This research was funded by the North American Strawberry Growers 
Association and a Praxis XXI scholarship from the Fundação para a 
Ciência e Tecnologia, Portugal. Journal Paper J-19053 of the Iowa Agri culture and Home Economics Experiment Station, Ames, Project 3564, and supported by Hatch Act and State funds. We thank D. Legard and A. 
Ureña, University of Florida GCREC-Dover, and B. Smith, USDA-ARS, 
Poplarville, MS, for the identification of our isolate, and the Iowa State 
University Bessey Microscopy Facility for the SEM pictures.  
LITERATURE CITED 1. Abril, M. 2001. Ultrastructural study of anthracnose infection of straw berry (Fragaria × ananassa) petiole and stolon by Colletotrichum acutatum and Colletotrichum fragariae. M.S. thesis. University of 
Southern Mississippi. 2. Anderson, J. G., and Smith, J. E. 1971. The production of conidiophores and conidia by newly germinated conidia of Aspergillus niger (micro cycle conidiation). J. Gen. Microbiol. 69:185-197. 3. Avant, J. 2001. Early ontogeny of the fungus Colletotrichum fragariae on strawberry and the ultrastructural localization of chitin. M.S. thesis. 
University of Southern Mississippi. 4. Bailey, J. A., O’Connell, R. J., Pring, R. J., and Nash, C. 1992. Infection strategies of Colletotrichum species. Pages 88-120 in: Colletotrichum: 
Biology, Pathology and Control. J. A. Bailey and M. J. Jeger, eds. CAB 
International, Wallingford, U.K. 5. Bergstrom, G. C., and Nicholson, R. L. 1999. The biology of corn anthracnose: Knowledge to exploit for improved management. Plant Dis. 83:596-608. 6. Boosalis, M. G. 1962. Precocious sporulation and longevity of conidia of 
Helminthosporium sativum in soil. Phytopathology 52:1172-1177. 7. Byrne, J. M., Hausbeck, M. K., and Hammerschmidt, R. 1997. Conidial germination and appressorium formation of Colletotrichum coccodes on tomato foliage. Plant Dis. 81:715-718. 8. Eastburn, D. M., and Gubler, W. D. 1990. Strawberry anthracnose: 
Detection and survival of Colletotrichum acutatum in soil. Plant Dis. 74:161-163. 9. Freeman, S., and Katan, T. 1997. Identification of Colletotrichum species responsible for anthracnose and root necrosis of strawberry in Israel. 
Phytopathology 87:516-521. 10. Howard, C. M., Chandler, C. K., and Albregts, E. E. 1991. Strawberry anthracnose in Florida. Pages 219-220 in: The Strawberry into the 21st 
Century: Proc. North Am. Strawberry Conf., 3rd. A. Dale and J. Luby, eds. Timber Press, Portland, OR. 11. Howard, C. M., Maas, J. L., Chandler, C. K., and Albergts, E. E. 1992. 
Anthracnose of strawberry caused by the Colletotrichum complex in 
Florida. Plant Dis. 76:976-981. 12. Leandro, L. F. S., Gleason, M. L., and Nutter, F. W., Jr. 1999. Production of secondary spores by Colletotrichum acutatum on strawberry leaves in the absence of infection. (Abstr.) Phytopathology 89(suppl.):S44. 13. Lee, D. 1993. Effect of temperature on the conidium germination and appressorium formation of Colletotrichum acutatum, C. dematium and 
C. gloeosporoides. Korean J. Mycol. 21:224-229. 14. Legard, D. E. 2000. Colletotrichum diseases of strawberry in Florida. 
Pages 292-299 in: Colletotrichum: Host Specificity, Pathology, and 
Host-Pathogen Interaction. D. Prusky, S. Freeman, and M. B. Dickman, eds. The American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. 15. Lingappa, B. T., and Lingappa, Y. 1969. Role of auto-inhibitors on mycelial growth and dimorphism of Glomerella cingulata. J. Gen. 
Microbiol. 56:35-45. 16. Maas, J. L., and Palm, M. E. 1997. Occurrence of anthracnose irregular leafspot, caused by Colletotrichum acutatum, on strawberry in Mary land. Adv. Strawberry Res. 16:68-70. 17. Mangenot, F., and Reisinger, O. 1976. Form and function of conidia as related to their development. Pages 789-847 in: The Fungal Spore: Form and Function. D. J. Weber and W. H. Hess, eds. Wiley-Interscience, New 
York. 18. McInnes, T. B., Black, L. L., and Gatti, J. M., Jr. 1992. Disease-free plants for management of strawberry anthracnose crown rot. Plant Dis. 76:260-264. 19. Mertely, J. C., and Legard, D. E. 2000. A freezing technique to detect latent infections of Colletotrichum spp. on strawberry. (Abstr.) Phyto pathology 90(suppl.):S53. 20. Nair, J., and Corbin, J. B. 1981. Histopathology of Pinus radiata seedlings infected by Colletotrichum acutatum f. sp. pinea. Phyto pathology 71:777-783. 21. Pantidou, M. E., and Schroeder, W. T. 1955. Foliage as a source of secondary inoculum for tomato anthracnose. Phytopathology 45:338-345. 22. Parbery, D. G., and Blakeman, J. P. 1978. Effect of substances associated with leaf surfaces on appressorium formation by Colletotrichum acu tatum. Trans. Br. Mycol. Soc. 70:7-19. 23. Peterson, R. A. 1977. Green leaves as a source of inoculum for anthrac nose fungi, with special reference to Colletotrichum acutatum on straw berry. M.S. thesis. University of Queensland, Australia.  24. Slade, S. J., Harris, R. F., Smith, C. S., and Andrews, J. H. 1987. Micro cycle conidiation and spore-carrying capacity of Colletotrichum gloeo sporoides on solid media. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 53:2106-2110. 25. Smith, B. J. 1998. Anthracnose crown rot. Pages 46-48 in: Compendium of Strawberry Diseases. 2nd ed. J. L. Maas, ed. The American Phyto pathological Society, St. Paul, MN. 26. Smith, B. J. 1998. Anthracnose fruit rot (black spot). Pages 31-33 in: 
Compendium of Strawberry Diseases, 2nd ed. J. L. Maas, ed. The 
American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. 27. Smith, J. E., Anderson, J. G., Deans, S. G., and Berry, D. R. 1981. 
Biochemistry of microcycle conidiation. Pages 329-356 in: Biology of 
Conidial Fungi, Vol. 2. G. T. Cole and B. Kendrick, eds. Academic Press, 
New York. 28. Timmer, L. W., and Brown, G. E. 2000. Biology and control of anthrac nose diseases of citrus. Pages 300-316 in: Colletotrichum: Host 
Specificity, Pathology and Host-Pathogen Interaction. D. Prusky, S. 
Freeman, and M. B. Dickman, eds. The American Phytopathological 
Society, St. Paul, MN. 29. Yang, X., Wilson, L. L., Madden, L. V., and Ellis, M. A. 1990. Rain splash dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum from infected strawberry fruit. Phytopathology 80:590-595. 30. Zulfiqar, M., Bransky, R. H., and Timmer, L. W. 1996. Infection of flower and vegetative tissues of citrus by Colletotrichum acutatum and 
C. gloeosporoides. Mycologia 88:121-128.    