
untitled 784 Plant Disease / Vol. 89 No. 8 N. A. Peres 
University of Florida, Gulf Coast Research and Education Center, Wimauma L. W. Timmer 
University of Florida, Citrus Research and Education Center, Lake Alfred J. E. Adaskaveg 
University of California, Riverside J. C. Correll 
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville   
Lifest yles of Colletotrichum acutatum  
Colletotrichum acutatum J.H. Sim monds is a common pathogen of a wide array of crops and noncultivated plant species (2,3,8,11,22,29,56,66,83,90). The fungus is cosmopolitan in its distribution and causes extensive crop losses every year. Disease symptoms range from fruit rots to shoot, leaf, and flower blights. 
Common hosts include many dicotyledo nous plants such as strawberry, apple, cit rus, and stone fruits, but serious diseases on leatherleaf fern and pines also have been reported (22,62). There are no known reports of C. acutatum affecting grasses. 
Although C. acutatum has been well docu mented from agricultural hosts, recent reports of recovery of C. acutatum from a moribund sea turtle (59) and a native forest (55) suggest that this fungus may inhabit other less-studied niches. 
C. acutatum was first described as a sep arate species by Simmonds (74,75). Many of the isolates now known to be C. acu tatum were either included in C. gloeo sporioides (Penz.) Penz. & Sacc. in Penz, or were considered to be species of Gloeo sporium (von Arx). C. acutatum affects many hosts that are also attacked by other 
Colletotrichum species, which may have been the reason for failure to recognize it as a separate taxon. For example, straw berry is affected by C. acutatum, C. gloeo sporioides, and C. fragariae Brooks (29,33,37,41,56,76,77). C. gloeosporioides and C. fragariae usually cause petiole and stolon lesions and crown rot on strawberry but may also produce fruit symptoms (76). 
C. acutatum produces symptoms on flow ers, leaves, petioles, and roots, but is most important as a fruit rot of strawberry. Cit rus, apples, mangos, papayas, and avoca dos are also affected by both C. acutatum and C. gloeosporioides (3,30,83). On cit rus, C. gloeosporioides is a common sap rophyte and may cause postharvest an thracnose from preharvest quiescent infections. C. acutatum does not produce postharvest anthracnose on citrus fruit, but causes distinct diseases on different spe cies of citrus, such as postbloom fruit drop and key lime anthracnose (83,84). On apple, bitter rot is caused by C. gloeo sporioides (Glomerella cingulata (Stone ham.) Schrenk & Spaulding), as well as C. acutatum (38,73,81). A leaf spot disease caused by Glomerella cingulata has been reported in Brazil and the United States (38,46), but C. acutatum is not known to attack apple leaves. 
Much of the research in recent years has been dedicated to elucidating the etiology of diseases caused by Colletotrichum spp. and the population dynamics of these pathogens. Research has emphasized dif ferentiation of the species of Colleto trichum on each host and determining their role in producing the observed symptoms. 
Less effort has been dedicated to determin ing the life cycle of C. acutatum in each situation, its means of survival and dis semination, and its host specificity. In this article, we will assess the status of our knowledge on the lifestyles of C. acu tatum, including infection and colonization strategies on different hosts, the role of various asexual structures such as conidia and appressoria, and the role of the sexual stage in selected disease cycles. To define lifestyles more effectively, we needed to clarify the taxonomy of the fungus and to differentiate those diseases caused by C. acutatum from those caused by other spe cies of Colletotrichum. We also explore our understanding of the ability of C. acu tatum to move between hosts and cause disease, and the genetic relatedness of isolates of C. acutatum from different hosts. Information in some areas is limited, and we identify gaps in our understanding of diseases caused by C. acutatum and potential areas for future research. Taxonomic Relationships 
Morphology of C. acutatum. C. acu tatum is an Ascomycete classified in the 
Pyrenomycetes and included in the family 
Phyllachoraceae (80). Colonies of C. acu tatum are usually white initially and later become covered with pink to orange co nidial masses (92) (Fig. 1A). Cultures from some hosts are highly chromogenic and excrete red and pink pigments into the culture media (10). The primary produc tion of conidia is in acervuli; however, C. acutatum also is capable of forming secon dary conidia on the surface of living leaves (49). Conidia are usually ellipsoid and fusiform (Fig. 1B), at least at one end, rather than typically having both ends rounded like C. gloeosporioides (1). Setae are usually sparse if produced at all. Pig mented appressoria are produced upon germination of the conidia and vary in shape and size (6). 
The sexual stage of certain genetic sub groups of C. acutatum has been character ized under laboratory conditions and has been designated as Glomerella acutata (39) (Fig. 2). Guerber et al. (40) found that a large number of isolates from diverse hosts were capable of mating and forming mature perithecia in culture (Fig. 2). 
Crosses within isolates in the group C, and some intergroup crosses, were highly fer tile, but others were weakly fertile or infer tile. However, mating compatibility in C. acutatum and other Colletotrichum species is complex (40,88). 
Corresponding author: N. A. Peres, Assistant Pro fessor, University of Florida, Gulf Coast Research and Education Center, Wimauma, FL 33598; E-mail: naperes@ifas.ufl.edu 
Florida Agricultural Experiment Station JournalSeries No. R-10814. 
DOI: 10.1094 / PD-89-0784 © 2005 The American Phytopathological Society 
Plant Disease / August 2005 785 
Differentiation of C. acutatum from other species of Colletotrichum. Morpho logical characteristics such as colony mor phology, conidial shape, the presence or absence of setae and sclerotia, and appres sorium shape and size have been used for differentiation of species in the genus Col letotrichum (80) (Fig. 1A and B). Morpho logical traits, however, are highly variable among isolates and often subject to inter pretation. Other characters, such as growth rates and sensitivity to benomyl, have been helpful to differentiate C. acutatum and C. gloeosporioides. C. acutatum is neither highly sensitive nor highly tolerant to be nomyl (2,11,30,68). Levels of 0.1 to 1.0 µl/ml cause 20 to 50% growth inhibition of 
C. acutatum, but are usually completely inhibitory to other species of Colleto trichum. However, C. acutatum is more sensitive to benomyl than resistant isolates of other species of Colletotrichum (68). 
A great deal of effort has been dedicated to determining which species of Colleto trichum are involved in the many anthrac nose-type diseases of plants, and to the development of tools to identify and differ entiate them (13–15,26,27,29,44,72,78,79). 
As pointed out by Freeman (27), multiple hosts can be affected by a single species, and multiple species can affect a single host. Simmonds (74,75) first described C. acutatum as a new species, distinct from 
C. gloeosporioides, based on isolates from fruit rots in Australia. Additional detailed morphological descriptions were published later (10,23,48). Most of the fungi in cluded in C. acutatum were formerly as signed to C. gloeosporioides with the teleomorph being Glomerella cingulata (10,80,89). Many species formerly consid ered to be Gloeosporium (9) are now also included in C. acutatum. In recent years, different tools, such as vegetative compati bility groups and isozymes, as well as molecular tools, such as random amplifica tion of polymorphic DNA (RAPD), spe cies-specific primers, and sequencing of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of nuclear ribosomal DNA and other re gions of the genome have been useful in separating C. acutatum from other species of Colletotrichum (2,12,14,29,30,33,41, 44,77). 
While the role and the identity of spe cies involved in anthracnose diseases is not always clear, we now have a much better understanding of the different species and the means available to differentiate them. 
Almond anthracnose, for example, was thought to be caused by C. gloeo sporioides, based on the morphology of the pathogen (33). More recently, almond isolates from California (2) and Israel (31) have been identified as C. acutatum pri marily by use of molecular tools. Such tools have been very useful in determining, not only the identities of isolates, but also the relationships among them (1,78,79). 
The citrus postbloom fruit drop pathogen was also originally identified as C. gloeo sporioides (83), but was later found to be C. acutatum (14). 
Intraspecific relationships. C. acu tatum sensu lato may be considered a group species, and the relationships among populations from different host plants are not clear (28,40,48). Two subspecific forms or physiological taxa of C. acutatum have been described, C. acutatum f. sp. pineum (22) and C. acutatum f. sp. chro mogenum (10). C. acutatum f. sp. pineum was not separated from C. acutatum mor phologically and was designated primarily on the basis of its pathogenicity to pines. 
C. acutatum f. sp. chromogenum was dis tinguished on the basis of pink and red pigments in the agar medium in culture (10). Sutton (80) did not feel either sub specific designation was valid. However, populations of C. acutatum have been characterized and studied. Lardner et al. (48) found that C. acutatum f. sp. pineum from New Zealand and Australia formed two separate groups based on RAPD anal ysis and analysis of vegetative compatibil ity. According to Guerber et al. (40), iso lates from pine in New Zealand were clearly polyphyletic using restriction frag ment length polymorphism (RFLP) of mtDNA and the 900-bp intron of the gluta mine synthase gene, as well as DNA se quences of the latter gene and of the 200 bp intron of the glyceraldehyde-3-phos phate dehydrogenase gene. Adaskaveg and 
Förster (1) designated and mapped the distribution of two subgroups (e.g., pink and gray) of C. acutatum based on RAPD patterns and cultural morphology on al mond in California over several years. 
Although several studies have been con ducted in recent years to characterize iso lates, currently there are no formally accepted subspecific nomenclatural desig nations within C. acutatum. Often C. acutatum sensu Simmonds (74,75), from fruit crops is distinguished from the other groups of isolates of C. acutatum from diverse crop species (44,48). Lardner et al. (48) separated several groups of isolates based on morphology and found that the separation was supported by analysis of 
RAPDs and vegetative compatibility. 
Three groups (A, B, and C) included iso lates from diseased fruit; two groups (D and E) were from lupine; another group 
Fig. 1. A, Variation in colony color and morphology among cultures of Colletotrichum acutatum sensu Simmonds. Chromogenic isolates are not illustrated. Rings are due to alternating light and dark cycles; B, typical conidia. 
Fig. 2. Glomerella acutata, the teleomorph of Colletotrichum acutatum: A, mating sys tem on toothpicks in culture; B and C, perithecia formed on toothpicks in culture; D, close-up of perithecia; E and F, asci with ascospores. 786 Plant Disease / Vol. 89 No. 8 included pine isolates designated C. acu tatum f. sp. pineum; and a last group con tained isolates of Glomerella miyabeana (Fukuski) Arx from willow. Guerber et al. (40) supported the recognition of G. miya beana as a species distinct from C. acu tatum, but additional work with other isolates failed to support the pine group as a unique population (40). In a study with anthracnose isolates from lupine, Niren berg et al. (61) described a new species, C. lupini (Bondar) Nirenberg, Feiler & 
Hagedorn. Separation was based on morphological, physiological, and mo lecular criteria. Guerber et al. (40) found that lupine isolates were distinguished in subgroups J2 and J6 from other isolates of 
C. acutatum in clades C, D, E, and J4, including one isolate from France that was placed as C. lupini by Nirenberg et al. (61). Talhinhas et al. (82) also considered all lupine isolates as C. acutatum that formed a distinct subgroup separate from all isolates from other hosts. Thus, despite segregation of some isolates into new spe cies such as C. lupini and others (e.g., G. miyabeana), C. acutatum remains as a genetically distinct collection of closely related isolates. 
Groupings of isolates by host or geo graphic region do not necessarily corre spond to those based on molecular criteria. 
Freeman et al. (32) characterized isolates of C. acutatum from Israel using arbitrarily primed PCR and AT-rich DNA analyses and found four subgroups. Subgroups were confirmed using sequences of the ITS 2 region alone or the complete ITS region. 
Freeman’s subgroup I contained isolates from almond, apple, peach, and pecan from the United States, but Israeli isolates from almond were in subgroup IV. Guer ber et al. (40) found that isolates from many different hosts and many different countries fell into the same genetic sub groups. The Guerber’s subgroup C included isolates from almond, apple, avo cado, blueberry, cherimoya, citrus, cran berry, dodder, grape, strawberry, and kiwi, among others, from the United States and 
New Zealand. Nevertheless, isolates from key lime and other citrus, as well as isolates from leatherleaf fern from Florida in the United States, fell into Guerber’s subgroup J along with all of the lupine isolates from the U.K., France, and Can ada. Denoyes-Rothan et al. (19) compared isolates from strawberries and other hosts using RAPDs and sequence analyses of the 
ITS 2 region and found that isolates from strawberries, mostly from Europe and the 
United States, were nearly identical, but that isolates from other hosts were vari able. 
Thus, the general conclusion from most of the research is that C. acutatum is com posed of genetic subgroups that show little indication of host specificity, although there are some indications of specialization of some isolates on certain hosts. As noted above, isolates from key lime formed a single group. Studies by Peres et al. (67) using sequences of the entire ITS region and the 200-bp intron of the glyceralde hyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene, as well as RAPDs, found that isolates from postbloom fruit drop–affected citrus flow ers from Brazil, Costa Rica, Belize, Mex ico, the Dominican Republic, and Florida were closely related and did not group based on geographic origin. Isolates from key lime from the same countries were also very closely related but differed slightly from the postbloom fruit drop isolates. Thus, isolates from postbloom fruit drop on sweet orange and those from key lime anthracnose form two separate populations regardless of their country of origin. 
The situation on citrus presents an inter esting opportunity to study the evolution of pathogenicity and the movement of patho gens between hosts and countries. Post bloom fruit drop is of rather recent origin. 
The disease and its causal agent were first described in Belize in 1979 (25). However, there are informal reports and letters from the late 1950s and the 1960s describing the symptoms on citrus in Belize and Colom bia (25; W. Reuther, personal communica tion). Postbloom fruit symptoms are obvi ous and the effects on yield are dramatic; thus, it would be unlikely that the disease would have gone unnoticed for extended   
Table 1. Plant tissues affected by Colletotrichum acutatum on selected hosts   Apple/ peach  Blueberry Sweet  orange  Strawberry Key  lime  
Almond   Young leaves/twigs  –a (+) – + + +   Flowers  – (+) + + + +   Fruit preharvest – + – + + +   Fruit postharvest + + – (+) – (+)   Roots/crowns – – – + – –   a – = No symptoms; + = symptoms; (+) = symptoms occur but not common.   
Fig. 3. Anthracnose symptoms caused by Colletotrichum acutatum on foliage, fruit, and branches of almond. A, Mummified almond fruit (left) with pink to orange sporulating lesions and a mature fruit (right) with recent gumming infections; B, foliage and fruit (arrow) symptoms on a detached branch; C, affected immature fruit showing external (top fruit) and internal (bottom fruit) symptoms; D, dieback of almond branches caused by anthracnose. Bars = 1 cm. 
Plant Disease / August 2005 787 periods in commercial citrus groves. Re ports of key lime anthracnose go back at least to the early 1900s (83). It was pro posed originally that postbloom fruit drop may have originated when isolates from key lime anthracnose moved into other citrus species (6). The molecular data of 
Peres et al. (67) are not inconsistent with that hypothesis, but if the populations of C. acutatum on key lime and other citrus species have common ancestors, they probably diverged some time ago. Indica tions are that postbloom fruit drop isolates were distributed to all of the citrus-grow ing areas of the Americas within 30 to 40 years, probably by movement of plant material bearing appressoria. 
Disease Symptoms  and Tissues Affected 
Symptoms caused by C. acutatum are primarily necroses including blights on various types of host tissues such as leaves, petioles, flowers, fruit, or even roots on a wide range of hosts. However, the patho gen is not a general necrotroph attacking only young tissue or senescent tissues. 
Rather, this pathogen is highly specialized as to the tissue it attacks on each host. In some cases, one juvenile tissue may be attacked, whereas other tissues are com pletely immune to infection. For example, flowers of sweet orange are severely af fected, but there are no symptoms pro duced on young leaves. With apples, the fruit is affected, but no symptoms occur on leaves. The fungus is probably best consid ered as a hemibiotroph in the broad sense, in that it has biotrophic and necrotrophic phases depending on the host and the tis sue infected on any specific host. 
C. acutatum infects susceptible cultivars of almond as a general necrotroph of young tissues, including leaves, twigs, flowers, and fruit (1,2,26) (Table 1, Fig. 3). 
Thus, when rain occurs during warm weather, newly developing shoots and flowers may be severely blighted. A similar situation occurs on key lime where all shoots and leaves may be killed by the pathogen (6,83). In both cases, destructive and disfiguring lesions are produced on fruit. 
Interestingly, all of the young tissues of key lime are susceptible and severely at tacked by C. acutatum (Fig. 4A, Table 1). 
However, on sweet orange and most other citrus crops, including Tahiti lime, only flower tissues are infected and develop postbloom fruit drop (Fig. 4B and C); vegetative tissues are immune (Table 1). 
Isolates of C. acutatum from key lime produce all of the symptoms of postbloom fruit drop on sweet orange, but isolates from postbloom fruit drop–affected sweet orange produce little anthracnose damage on key lime (6). Postbloom fruit drop of citrus appears to be unique among diseases caused by C. acutatum in that symptoms are induced by plant hormones (47,53). 
Natural citrus fruit abscission usually oc curs at the base of the peduncle at the at tachment to the stem, but with postbloom fruit drop, abscission is at the base of the fruit leaving persistent calyces and pedun cles. Leaves around the infected inflores cences usually become small and disfig ured. Genes encoding ethylene and jasmonic acid biosyntheses and indole-3 acetic acid regulation were found to be highly induced by C. acutatum infection (53). Indole acetic acid increased as much as 140-fold in infected petals compared with healthy controls (47). 
On some hosts, such as apple and blue berry, C. acutatum is a preharvest problem in fruit production and also is a postharvest pathogen (45,60,73). On these plants, qui escent infections that occur prior to harvest begin to develop as the fruit ripens. Those infections then develop into ripe rot of blueberry (Fig. 5A) and bitter rot of apple (Fig. 5B) after harvest. Likewise, posthar vest symptoms may occur with anthrac nose diseases of peaches, almonds, and other stone fruits (11,91). There are many other examples of postharvest decays on tropical fruits such as avocado, mango, papaya, and guava that develop from qui 
Fig. 5. Fruit diseases caused by Colletotrichum acutatum: A, ripe rot of blueberry (courtesy A. M. C. Schilder, Michigan State 
University); B, bitter rot of apple (courtesy J. I. Boneti, Epagri, Santa Catarina, Brazil). 
Fig. 4. Symptoms caused by Colletotrichum acutatum on citrus: A, foliar and preharvest fruit lesions on key lime; B, infected flowers of sweet orange; C, persistent calyces remaining following fruit drop. 788 Plant Disease / Vol. 89 No. 8 escent infections occurring in the field (3,8,34,66). 
C. acutatum produces a wide range of symptoms on various tissues of the straw berry plant (Table 1). The pathogen is not a general necrotroph on all tissues of straw berry, but it is most important as a necro troph causing serious fruit rot (76). Le sions on petioles are produced from quiescent infections after the plants are established (Fig. 6A). Later, flowers may be attacked, and ripe and unripe fruit de velop symptoms normally referred to as black spot (Fig. 6B and C). Strawberry is unique in that roots and crowns can be infected by C. acutatum (Fig. 6D, Table 1) causing severe stunting or even plant death (Fig. 6E). The source of inoculum for root infection is uncertain. Conidia or possibly appressoria on the upper parts of the plant may be washed down to the crown and roots during digging, washing, and trans planting, and mechanical damage and stress caused by these processes may fa cilitate root infection. Host and Tissue Specificity 
Many inoculation studies have been conducted with Colletotrichum spp., dem onstrating that most isolates are relatively non-host-specific (7,27,30,34). However, relatively few studies have dealt with host specificity of C. acutatum. Bernstein et al. (11) inoculated nonwounded, detached ripe peach fruit with isolates of Colletotrichum spp. from a number of different hosts. 
They found that lesion size was not related to the source of the isolate. Freeman and 
Shabi (34) inoculated detached nectarine, mango, avocado, almond, and apple fruit with conidial suspensions of isolates of C. acutatum from apple and peach. All iso lates produced lesions on fruit, but it was necessary to wound the mango fruit to obtain infection. Peres et al. (66) found that a C. acutatum isolate from strawberry produced lesions on wounded, detached fruit of avocado, guava, papaya, mango, and passion fruit, but not banana. Isolates from strawberry also produced lesions on wounded and nonwounded fruit of pear, peach, nectarine, and apple (28). Thus, it would appear that C. acutatum has a broad host range, at least among fruit crops, and is relatively nonspecific. Many of the above studies, however, were done in the laboratory using detached and wounded fruit. Movement of C. acutatum from one fruit crop to another under natural condi tions has not been demonstrated, and mo lecular groups often seem to be host spe cific (43). 
Isolates from certain hosts do show at least some specificity. Pathogenicity of C. acutatum isolates from lupine, pine, to mato, and persimmon fruit was evaluated on pine and lupine seedlings (48). All iso lates from pine were nonpathogenic or weakly pathogenic to lupine and vice versa. The fruit isolates were not patho genic on either pine or lupine. 
In Israel (35), inoculation of isolates of 
C. acutatum from anemone and strawberry into each host resulted in typical anthrac nose symptoms on both plant species. Mo lecular studies indicated that the isolates from the two hosts were similar and formed a single genetic subgroup (35). 
Isolates of C. acutatum were recovered from pepper, eggplant, tomato, bean, as well as from weeds of the genera Vicia and 
Conyza; however, disease symptoms oc curred only on strawberry (28). C. acu tatum isolates from tulip tree in Argentina were also pathogenic to strawberry fruit (54). Thus, strawberry isolates of C. acu tatum can parasitize and cause disease on other hosts or, alternatively, survive on other crops and on weeds without produc ing symptoms. Dissemination and Survival 
Dispersal. Conidia of C. acutatum are usually produced in acervuli on host tissue and are typically rain-splash dispersed (4,57,58,63). On low-growing crops such as strawberry, conidia are spread over short distances (57,58), and use of straw as a ground cover can greatly reduce dispersal of conidia (57). On tree crops, dispersal by wind-blown rain can occur over much greater distances. With repeated cycles of infection on sweet orange flowers, post bloom fruit drop of citrus can spread over large areas in a single season (4). On cit rus, environmental factors, amounts of inoculum, and other factors affecting the epidemiology of postbloom fruit drop have been used to develop models to predict disease and forecast the need for fungicide applications (65,86). 
There is no evidence that ascospores function in the dispersal of any disease caused by C. acutatum. Guerber and Cor rell (39) found nine vegetative compatibil ity groups (VCGs) in a single apple or chard. However, Gonzalez and Sutton (38) found only two VCGs in three North Caro lina orchards and concluded that once isolates were established in an orchard, they persisted over time. Thus, additional studies are needed on the biology and population genetics of C. acutatum to elucidate the importance of the sexual stage in the overall life cycle. 
Survival on agricultural crops. The role of epiphytic stages and quiescent  infections on survival of the fungus is  not clear with many diseases caused by   
Fig. 6. Symptoms caused by Colletotrichum acutatum on strawberry: A, petiole lesions with acervuli (arrow); B, fruit lesions on un ripe fruit (black spot); C, lesions on ripe fruit; D, root rot; E, plants killed or stunted by the pathogen. 
Plant Disease / August 2005 789 
C. acutatum. With postbloom fruit drop on citrus, appressoria on mature tissues are essential for the survival of the pathogen (5,6,83,92). Since flowers are the only susceptible tissue and they occur only seasonally, the fungus survives as appres soria and quiescent infections on mature leaves (6,92). When flowers appear, leachates from flowers induce germination of appressoria and the production of co nidia that infect new flowers. With straw berries, C. acutatum is usually introduced into production fields from nurseries. 
Some plants may be symptomatic, but many times the pathogen is introduced on asymptomatic leaves or petioles, presuma bly as appressoria and quiescent infections. 
Whether quiescent infections develop into lesions or whether appressoria germinate to produce conidia is not clear. However, conidia of C. acutatum can produce several secondary conidia from each conidium deposited on the leaf surface (49,50,51) (Fig. 7). The numbers of conidia produced suggest that the fungus is reproducing by utilizing nutrients on the leaf surface rather than reserves from the original conidium. 
In these cases, it would appear that the fungus is growing as an epiphyte and not necessarily producing quiescent infections. 
On blueberries, recent studies suggest that flower buds become infected and produce quiescent infections during the summer and that the pathogen overwinters in those structures (17,18). On almonds, it appears that mummified fruit that remain on the tree throughout tree dormancy are the main source of conidia for infections in spring (1). 
Survival on alternative hosts. The role of alternative hosts in the cycle of diseases caused by C. acutatum also is not clear in most instances. Since C. acutatum from anemone also can infect strawberry, and vice versa (35), spread could occur from one crop to another. Freeman et al. (28) also found that C. acutatum was capable of colonizing weeds such as Vicia spp. and 
Conyza spp. surrounding strawberry fields and could survive 3 months on tomato, pepper, and eggplant leaves (28). Thus, the pathogen could be spreading from straw berry to weeds adjacent to strawberry fields and then reinfesting new strawberry fields the following year. Molecular and vegetative compatibility studies indicated that isolates from weeds, anemone, and strawberry form a single population in 
Israel (32). Further studies demonstrated that C. acutatum failed to penetrate ini tially on tissue of pepper, eggplant, and tomato but intercellular penetration oc curred later, suggesting that the fungus can probably live as an endophyte on these hosts (42). 
Although C. acutatum isolates from tropical fruits cross-infect well under labo ratory conditions (7,34,66), the extent to which cross-infection occurs in nature, and the degree to which disease cycles on one crop depend on the ability of a given group of isolates to survive on a different crop is not known. We suspect that this is not common in most situations. Despite a se vere problem with anthracnose of key limes in western Mexico, postbloom fruit drop has never developed on oranges or 
Tahiti limes grown in the area. Both straw berries and citrus are grown in Central 
Florida, and there is no indication of cross infection. Instead, molecular studies indi cate that strawberry and citrus isolates differ considerably (14). Similarly, in Cali fornia, genetically distinct populations were identified from adjacent almond and strawberry fields (26). 
Survival in the environment. C. acu tatum appears to compete poorly as a sap rophyte (5), but can survive in soil and on inanimate surfaces for various periods depending on the conditions. Eastburn and 
Gubler (24) found that mycelium in straw berry tissue survived in air-dried soil for at least 7 weeks, even at temperatures up to 40°C, and it survived in moist soil for 7 weeks at 10 and 25°C. Freeman et al. (36) found that conidia of C. acutatum survived for at least 1 year in air-dry soil; however, in soil at field capacity, conidia survived less than 2 weeks. At 11% soil moisture, the time required for 95% loss of viability was 70 to 75 days. C. acutatum could not be recovered from strawberry naturally infected crowns buried in methyl-bromide fumigated or nontreated soil after 5 months. In Florida, C. acutatum could no longer be recovered from buried infected crowns after 56 days (87). 
Conidia of C. acutatum from leatherleaf fern survived up to 1 year in dry soil in 
Florida (62). Survival was shorter in moist soil, and conidia maintained their viability for about 35 days in soils at 12 to 24% moisture. In leaf debris, the fungus was still viable after 56 days when soil mois ture was 6% or less, but not at higher moisture levels. C. acutatum remained viable for at least 105 days when infected plants were buried in field plots, and co nidia remained viable on fabric for 35 to 45 days. 
Thus, conidia of C. acutatum can sur vive for extended periods in debris or soil under dry conditions. However, the fungus is unable to compete or multiply on leaf debris or in soil under moist conditions where other organisms are active. Host–Pathogen Interactions 
Infection process and colonization. 
Although C. acutatum usually produces necrotic symptoms of various types on most hosts, the host–pathogen interaction appears to be more biotrophic than that of some other species such as C. gloeo sporioides (28). C. acutatum survives and competes poorly as a saprophyte in most cases (24,62). Nevertheless, C. acutatum has been isolated from many plant species and has not always been associated with disease. This species may colonize the surface of plant tissues as an epiphyte or endophyte under some circumstances, on both hosts and nonhosts, without produc ing symptoms (35,42,45). 
O’Connell et al. (64) and Perfect et al. (69) described two types of interactions between Colletotrichum spp. and their hosts: intercellular hemibiotrophy and subcuticular intramural necrotrophy. With 
C. acutatum, there are few studies on the cytology of the infection process and the nature of early biotrophic relationships or quiescent infections established between pathogen and host. However, based on studies with C. acutatum on specific hosts, four types of interactions or infection strategies can be described (16,21,90,92). 
Conidia germinate and form appressoria on the tissue surface and infection pegs that penetrate the cuticle (Fig. 8). Internal light spots at the contact point between the appressorium and the tissue surfaces have been assumed to be the points of emer gence of the infection peg (16,92) (Fig. 9). 
However, on strawberry leaves, Leandro et al. (50) questioned whether appressorium formation was followed by quiescent infections, and whether the internal light spots represented infection pegs or were just contact points between the ap pressorium and the host surface. In a de tailed study, Diéguez-Uribeondo et al. (20) determined that internal light spots in ap pressorium formation on almond leaves corresponded to penetration pores and were followed by production of an infec tion peg and colonization of host cells. 
Fig. 8. Appressoria of Colletotrichum acutatum formed following germination of conidia. c = original conidium, 2-celled after germination; a = appressorium, arrow indicates the internal light spot. 
Fig. 7. Scanning electron micrograph of secondary conidiation of Colletotrichum acutatum on an almond leaf. c = conid ium; sc = secondary conidium. 790 Plant Disease / Vol. 89 No. 8 
The sequence and nature of the infection process, including the initial penetration phase that may be a biotrophic or quies cent relationship, and subsequent develop ment of infection hyphae and colonization of the host varies and is not well under stood in most cases. With citrus postbloom fruit drop, the infection strategy on leaves is presumably biotrophic. After the end of the bloom period, conidia germinate to form appressoria, and quiescent infections are established that are probably intra cellular (6,92) (Fig. 10A). The tissues where quiescent infections develop are never colonized and necrotrophy does not occur on leaves, but rather conidia and secondary conidia are produced following germination of the appressorium on the surface. Still, on flower petals, the patho gen is a necrotroph. With all tissues of key lime and strawberries, the biotrophic phase is very short. The pathogen produces ap pressoria, penetrates the host, and forms a subcuticular intramural necrotrophic as sociation almost immediately (16) (Fig. 10B). Curry et al. (16) considered this strategy a modification of necrotrophy rather than bio- or hemibiotrophy because the biotrophic phase is so short. 
With blueberry and many fruit crops (e.g., peach, apple, and many tropical fruits), other interactions or infection strategies may be occurring. Interactions can be intracellular hemibiotrophy when infecting ripe fruit of susceptible cultivars, or subcuticular intramural necrotrophy when infecting fruit of resistant cultivars (Fig. 10C) (90). The hemibiotrophic inter action begins with appressorium formation on the fruit surface and continues with the establishment of quiescent infections with a relatively long biotrophic phase. When fruit ripen, necrotrophic inter- and intracel lular colonization occurs, tissues are exten sively invaded, and the fungus sporulates. 
On almond leaves and presumably fruit, a combination of hemibiotrophic and sub cuticular intramural necrotrophic infec tions occurs that results in intra- and inter cellular colonization (21) (Fig. 10D). In this case, the colonization is biotrophic after fungal penetration and becomes necrotrophic during intercellular growth. 
This is followed by inter- and intracellular colonization and death of the tissue. The mechanism for the shift from biotrophy to necrotrophy is not certain. However, C. acutatum, as well as other species of Col letotrichum, produce ammonia causing local pH increases during the shift to ne crotrophy (70). In most host–pathogen interactions, the specific interaction at the cellular level is unknown and may be a combination of strategies as shown with  
Fig. 10. Schematic drawings of different host–pathogen interactions and infection strategies of Colletotrichum acutatum. A, Biotro phic growth of C. acutatum with secondary conidiation. Conidia germinate to form appressoria and quiescent infections. Secondary conidia are formed after germination of the appressorium (e.g., predominantly biotrophic disease cycle on citrus leaves) (92). B, 
Subcuticular, intramural necrotrophy with hyphal development within periclinal and anticlinal walls of epidermal host cells. Note that host cell walls are swollen and wider apart (e.g., predominantly necrotrophic disease cycle on strawberry) (16). C, Hemibiotrophic interaction with infection vesicle and broad primary hyphae within host cell. Inter- and intracellular secondary hyphal growth is shown illustrating the subsequent necrotrophic phase (e.g., combination of bio- and necrotrophy but mostly biotrophic disease cy cle on blueberry fruit) (90). D, Hemibiotrophic and subcuticular, intra- and intercellular development of C. acutatum on almond (e.g., combination of bio- and necrotrophy but mostly necrotrophic disease cycle on almond leaves and fruit) (21). Cn = conidium; Gt = germ tube; Ap = appressorium; Iv = infection vesicle; Ph = primary hyphae; Sh = secondary hyphae; Sc = secondary conidium. Dead host cells are indicated with diagonal lines. Illustrations by J. E. Adaskaveg. 
Fig. 9. Appressoria of Colletotrichum acutatum on the surface of almond leaves showing the internal light spot (arrow) where the penetration peg emerges from the appressorium. c = conidium; a = appressorium. 
Plant Disease / August 2005 791 almond (21). Furthermore, these strategies may be dependent on host tissues. For example, in some cases on almond (21,90) and in most cases on citrus (92), petal tis sues of flowers are infected and colonized without the formation of appressoria, and there is no biotrophic phase. In general, these infection strategies lead to the differ ent lifestyles proposed below. Disease Cycles 
General disease cycles. The disease cy cles of C. acutatum from different hosts often have attributes in common. All pro duce acervuli with abundant conidia on one or more host tissues, and conidia are splash-dispersed and serve as the source of inoculum for most infections. Conidia may survive in a gelatinous matrix for some time if conditions are appropriate. How ever, more typically, conidia germinate to produce appressoria and quiescent infec tions. The tissue on which sporulation and reproduction occur differs among various hosts, and the fate of appressoria and quiescent infections also varies greatly. As far as is known, the sexual stage has only a minor role in the life cycle of C. acutatum. 
Although the pathogen exhibits overlap ping survival strategies, we can group dif ferent disease cycles of C. acutatum on different hosts according to four general lifestyles as follows: 
Leaf biotrophic–flower necrotrophic lifestyle (citrus). The lifestyle of C. acutatum on sweet orange is unique (83). 
The fungus functions as a necrotroph on flowers and as a biotroph on leaves (Table 2, Fig. 11). Thus, the fungus reproduces primarily on flower petals and does not readily colonize and form acervuli on other tissues (6,92). Acervuli only form on other tissues when the tissue is killed under artificial conditions, and the fungus does not reproduce in the absence of flowers (85,92). Survival of the fungus during nonflowering periods occurs by means of appressoria that form on the surface of leaves, twigs, and the persistent calyces formed as a result of flower infection. The quiescent infections do not develop and result in colonization of the leaf or other vegetative tissues, and normally the patho gen cannot be isolated from leaves. Ap pressoria can be stimulated to germinate and produce a few conidia artificially by application of petal extracts. It is presumed   
Table 2. Stages of life cycles of Colletotrichum acutatum on different hosts: structures and tissues involved and duration of the various stages    Host   Stage Blueberry Sweet orange Strawberry Almond   Biotrophy       Tissue Immature fruit Mature leaves Leave, petioles Leaves and fruit  tissues   Structures Appressoria Appressoria, sec. conidiaa Appressoria,  sec. conidia 
Appressoria,  sec. conidia   Duration Weeks Months Days Hours   Necrotrophy       Tissueb Ripe fruit Flowers All tissues All tissues   Overwintering       Tissue Bud scales,  dead twigs 
Mature leaves Leaves, petioles Fruit mummies,  dead twigs   Structures Appressoria, conidia,  mycelium 
Appressoria Appressoria Conidia, mycelium   a Secondary conidia.   b Tissues on which acervuli and conidia are produced.    
Fig. 11. Disease cycle of postbloom fruit drop on citrus caused by Colletotrichum acutatum. Long biotrophic phase on mature leaves and persistent calyces. Necrotrophic phase occurs only on flowers. a = appressorium; c = conidium; sc = secondary conidiation. 
Illustrations by Lynda E. Chandler. 792 Plant Disease / Vol. 89 No. 8 that in nature, petals falling on moist leaves result in stimulation of germination of appressoria on the surface and that the few secondary conidia produced are splash dispersed to the new flowers. So C. acu tatum behaves as a necrotroph on citrus during the flowering period and produces severe epidemics at that stage. However, for much of the year, the fungus lives biotrophically in quiescent infections on vegetative structures. 
Necrotrophic lifestyle (strawberry). C. acutatum is primarily a necrotroph on strawberry tissues (16) (Table 2, Fig. 12). 
It affects flower, fruit, leaf, and petiole tissue, and also produces root necrosis, which is highly unusual for this fungus. 
Roots of transplants are presumably con taminated during digging, trimming, and packing operations in the nursery. Thus, roots might not normally be infected when the crop is grown as a perennial. The man agement of strawberry as a crop affects the cycle of the pathogen. The plant is a peren nial, but as a cultivated plant, it is treated as an annual. Transplants are often pro duced far from commercial fields; thus, the fungus must survive as symptomatic or quiescent infections on transplants that will serve as inoculum for the commercial fields (52). The biotrophic phase is usually very short (16), but infected leaves, peti oles, and runners may not show symptoms for some time. Secondary conidiation can occur on the surface of vegetative tissues, and this can serve to augment inoculum levels to infect flowers and fruit (51). 
These few conidia formed on the foliage without causing symptoms are dispersed by splashing water and harvesting opera tions from the foliage to flowers and fruit. 
Primary inoculum for dispersal within the field is mostly dependent on the formation of spores in acervuli on petioles and fruit tissues. 
Fruit hemibiotrophic lifestyle (blue berry–apple–stone fruit). Fruit decays represent one common lifestyle of C. acu tatum (Table 2, Fig. 13) for diseases such as blueberry ripe rot, apple bitter rot, anthracnose of peach, and probably numerous anthracnose diseases of subtrop ical and tropical fruits. In the case of bitter rot of apple and ripe rot of blueberry, acervuli are produced in abundance on mature fruit (60,81). Conidia from acervuli are splash dispersed, germinate to form appressoria, and quiescent infections are established on fruit as has been dem onstrated on peaches (91). These diseases occur in the field as well as after harvest. 
However, most of the quiescent infections develop during the course of the season on these crops. In the case of blueberry, C. acutatum is also known to attack young leaves and other tissues, although this is rare (60,90). Thus, conidia from acervuli on leaves and decaying fruit could serve as a source of inoculum for other fruit, and the pathogen survives as appressoria in bud scales and dead fruiting twigs (17). With apple, the source of inoculum is not obvious since C. acutatum only causes disease on fruit (45,81). C. acutatum is apparently widespread in orchards and is readily isolated from healthy and damaged tissue. In Michigan, where bitter rot rarely occurs, C. acutatum is still widespread in apple orchards and commonly isolated (45). Thus, it would appear to be surviving and reproducing as an epiphyte or endophyte in those situations, similar to the epiphytic–short necrotroph lifestyle. 
Biotroph–necrotroph combination life style (almond–key lime). There are many diseases where C. acutatum functions pri marily as a necrotroph but can also func tion as a biotroph, and thus, the pathogen has a combination of biotrophic and necro trophic interactions. This lifestyle includes anthracnose of almond, key lime, and leatherleaf fern. In these cases, acervuli and conidia are produced in abundance on the affected tissues (Table 2). Conidia are splash-dispersed to healthy tissues that become infected in a short time (Fig. 14). 
The fungus can survive as dried conidia in acervuli or mycelia in dead tissues includ ing spurs and in mummified almond fruit (1). Once new growth develops, conidia from acervuli can initiate a new epidemic. 
Conidia may also be dispersed to mature tissues that are not susceptible to infection. 
Quiescent infections could develop and result in colonization of the leaf tissue  
Fig. 12. Disease cycle of anthracnose fruit rot of strawberries caused by Colletotrichum acutatum. Biotrophic phase primarily on runner transplants. Long necrotrophic phase on flowers, fruits, and petioles. Illustrations by Lynda E. Chandler. 
Plant Disease / August 2005 793    
Fig. 14. Disease cycle of almond anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum acutatum. Biotrophic phase is brief; several hours after penetration, before the necrotrophic phase begins. Necrotrophic phase occurs on all tissues: flowers, leaves and fruits. Illustrations by Lynda E. Chandler.  
Fig. 13. Disease cycle of blueberry ripe rot caused by Colletotrichum acutatum. Long biotrophic phase on immature berries in the spring and summer and on bud scales in the winter. Necrotrophic phase primarily on ripe fruit and to a lesser extent on shoots and other tissues. Illustrations by Lynda E. Chandler. 794 Plant Disease / Vol. 89 No. 8 once the leaves senesce and eventually produce acervuli. 
Alternative lifestyles? Almost all re ports of the natural recovery of C. acu tatum have been from agricultural hosts. 
However, recent reports indicate that C. acutatum may inhabit a number of unex plored niches. For example, C. acutatum has been recovered from an immune-com promised sea turtle (59). Also, a single isolate of C. acutatum was recovered ap parently colonizing the leaves of a tree species in a native forest (55). Whether such isolates originated from agricultural ecosystems or could represent a source of such pathogens remains largely unex plored. Concluding Remarks 
Considerable progress has been made in recent years in delineating anthracnose diseases and their causal agents. Molecular tools have been effectively utilized to dis tinguish Colletotrichum species, clearly separate C. acutatum from C. gloeo sporioides, and identify genetically distinct subgroups with C. acutatum. However, the disease cycles of C. acutatum in many host–pathogen systems still remain poorly understood, even on economically impor tant crops. This pathogen has the ability to reproduce on many different types of tis sues on various hosts and can exist as a necrotroph, biotroph, endophyte, or epi phyte depending on the plant species and tissue involved. The tissues affected also are very specific for each host combina tion, and the pathogen develops a highly specialized relationship at the cellular level that is reflected in the disease cycle in each host case. The biotrophic and epiphytic phases of the pathogen and the means of reproduction of C. acutatum in the absence of pathogenesis are in need of further in vestigation. Tissue specificity and life cy cles of C. acutatum perhaps are clearly under genetic control, and it may be possi ble to induce mutants that are no longer pathogenic to certain hosts or tissues and determine the genetic basis for tissue or host specificity as has been done with other species of Colletotrichum (71). 
Few investigations of cross pathogenic ity and the host range of C. acutatum iso lates in nature have been conducted. If this pathogen truly has a broad host range and can move readily between hosts, it is inter esting that it has developed unique rela tionships with each plant species. Many investigators have limited crop responsi bilities, do not have facilities to handle temperate or tropical crops, or are limited in the isolates they can study due to biose curity regulations. Thus, these factors have limited studies of host ranges with large numbers of isolates. Perhaps, with ingenu ity and cooperative efforts, at least some of these studies can be conducted, and even tually we should be able to develop a bet ter understanding of movement and host specificity of C. acutatum and determine where restrictions on movement of plant materials are warranted. 
Literature Cited 1. Adaskaveg, J. E., and Förster, H. 2000. Occur rence and management of anthracnose epidem ics caused by Colletotrichum species on tree fruit crops in California. Pages 317-336 in: 
Colletotrichum: Host Specificity, Pathology, and Host-Pathogen Interactions. D. Prusky, S. 
Freeman, and M. B. Dickman, eds. American 
Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. 2. Adaskaveg, J. E., and Hartin, R. J. 1997. Char acterization of Colletotrichum acutatum iso lates causing anthracnose of almond and peach in California. Phytopathology 87:979-987. 3. Afanador-Kafuri, L., Minz, D., Maymon, M., and Freeman, S. 2003. Characterization of 
Colletotrichum isolates from tamarillo, passi flora, and mango in Colombia and identifica tion of a unique species from the genus. 
Phytopathology 93:579-587. 4. Agostini, J. P., Gottwald, T. R., and Timmer, L. 
W. 1993. Temporal and spatial dynamics of postbloom fruit drop of citrus in Florida. Phy topathology 83:485-490. 5. Agostini, J. P., and Timmer, L. W. 1994. Popu lation dynamics and survival of strains of Col letotrichum gloeosporioides on citrus in Flor ida. Phytopathology 84:420-425. 6. Agostini, J. P., Timmer, L. W., and Mitchell, D. 
J. 1992. Morphological and pathological char acteristics of strains of Colletotrichum gloeo sporioides from citrus. Phytopathology 82:1377-1382. 7. Alahakoon, P. W., Brown, A. E., and Sreeni vasaprasad, S. 1994. Cross infection potential of genetic groups of Colletotrichum gloeo sporioides on tropical fruits. Physiol. Mol. 
Plant Pathol. 44:93-103. 8. Arauz, L. F. 2000. Mango anthracnose: Eco nomic impact and current options for inte grated management. Plant Dis. 84:600-611. 9. Arx, J. A. von. 1970. A revision of the fungi classified as Gloeosporium. Biol. Mycol. 24:1 203. 10. Baxter, A. P., van der Westhuizen, G. C. A., and Eicker, A. 1983. Morphology and taxon omy of South African isolates of Colleto trichum. S. Afr. J. Bot. 2:259-289. 11. Bernstein, B., Zehr, E. I., Dean, R. A., and 
Shabi, E. 1995. Characteristics of Colleto trichum from peach, apple, pecan, and other hosts. Plant Dis. 79:478-482. 12. Bonde, M. R., Peterson, G. L., and Maas, J. L. 1991. Isozyme comparisons for identification of Colletotrichum species pathogenic to straw berry. Phytopathology 81:1523-1528. 13. Brown, A. E., and Soepena, H. 1994. Patho genicity of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. gloeosporioides on leaves of Hevea spp. My col. Res. 98:264-266. 14. Brown, A. E., Sreenivasaprasad, S., and 
Timmer, L. W. 1996. Molecular characteriza tion of slow-growing orange and key lime an thracnose strains of Colletotrichum from citrus as C. acutatum. Phytopathology 86:523-527. 15. Correll, J. C., Guerber, J. C., Wasilwa, L. A., 
Sherill, J. F., and Morelock, T. E. 2000. Inter- and intra-species variation in Colletotrichum and mechanisms which affect population struc ture. Pages 146-179 in: Colletotrichum: Host 
Specificity, Pathogenicity, and Host-Pathogen 
Interactions. D. Prusky, S. Freeman, and M. B. 
Dickman, eds. American Phytopathological 
Society, St. Paul, MN. 16. Curry, K. J., Abril, M., Avant, J. B., and Smith, 
B. J. 2002. Strawberry anthracnose: Histopa thology of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. fragariae. Phytopathology 92:1055-1063. 17. DeMarsay, A., and Oudemans, P. V. 2003. 
Colletotrichum acutatum infections in dormant highbush blueberry buds. (Abstr.) Phytopathol ogy 93:S20. 18. DeMarsay, A., and Oudemans, P. V. 2004. 
Blueberry anthracnose: From bud infection to fruit rot. (Abstr.) Phytopathology 94:S25. 19. Denoyes-Rothan, B., Guérin, G., Délye, C., 
Smith, B., Minz, D., Maymon, M., and Free man, S. 2003. Genetic diversity and patho genic variability among isolates of Colleto trichum species from strawberry. 
Phytopathology 93:219-228. 20. Diéguez-Uribeondo, J., Förster, H., and Adas kaveg, J. E. 2003. Digital image analysis of internal light spots of appressoria of Colleto trichum acutatum. Phytopathology 93:923 930. 21. Diéguez-Uribeondo, J., Főrster, H., Soto
Estrada, A., and Adaskaveg, J. E. Subcuticular intracellular hemitrophic and intercellular ne crotrophic development of Colletotrichum acu tatum on almond. Phytopathology 95:751-758. 22. Dingley, J. M., and Gilmore, J. W. 1972. Colle totrichum acutatum Simmonds f. sp. pineum associated with terminal crook disease of 
Pinus spp. N.Z. J. For. Sci. 2:192-201. 23. Dyko, B. J., and Mordue, J. E. M. 1979. CMI descriptions of pathogenic fungi and bacteria. 
No. 630, Colletotrichum acutatum. Common wealth Mycological Institute, Kew, Surrey, 
England.  24. Eastburn, D. M., and Gubler, W. D. 1990. 
Strawberry anthracnose: Detection and sur vival of Colletotrichum acutatum in soil. Plant 
Dis. 74:161-163. 25. Fagan, H. J. 1979. Postbloom fruit drop, a new disease of citrus associated with a form of Col letotrichum gloeosporioides. Ann. Appl. Biol. 91:13-20. 26. Förster, H., and Adaskaveg, J. E. 1999. Identi fication of subpopulations of Colletotrichum acutatum and epidemiology of almond an thracnose in California. Phytopathology 89:1056-1065. 27. Freeman, S. 2000. Genetic diversity and host specificity of Colletotrichum species on vari ous fruits. Pages 131-144 in: Colletotrichum: 
Host Specificity, Pathology, and Host-Patho gen Interactions. D. Prusky, S. Freeman, and 
M. B. Dickman, eds. American Phytopatho logical Society, St. Paul, MN. 28. Freeman, S., Horowitz, S., and Sharon, A. 2001. Pathogenic and nonpathogenic lifestyles in Colletotrichum acutatum from strawberry and other plants. Phytopathology 91:986-992. 29. Freeman, S., and Katan, T. 1997. Identification of Colletotrichum species responsible for an thracnose and root necrosis of strawberry in Is rael. Phytopathology 87:516-521. 30. Freeman, S., Katan, T., and Shabi, E. 1998. 
Characterization of Colletotrichum species re sponsible for anthracnose diseases of various fruits. Plant Dis. 82:596-605. 31. Freeman, S., Minz, D., Jurkevitch, E., May mon, M., and Shabi, E. 2000. Molecular analy ses of Colletotrichum species from almond and other fruits. Phytopathology 90:608-614. 32. Freeman, S., Minz, D., Maymon, M., and 
Zveibil, A. 2001. Genetic diversity within Col letotrichum acutatum sensu Simmonds. Phyto pathology 91:586-592. 33. Freeman, S., and Rodriguez, R. J. 1995. Dif ferentiation of Colletotrichum species respon sible for anthracnose of strawberry by arbitrar ily primed PCR. Mycol. Res. 99:501-504. 34. Freeman, S., and Shabi, E. 1996. Cross-infec tion of subtropical and temperate fruits by Col letotrichum species from various hosts. 
Physiol. Mol. Plant Pathol. 49:395-404. 35. Freeman, S., Shabi, E., and Katan, T. 2000. 
Characterization of Colletotrichum acutatum causing anthracnose of anemone (Anemone coronaria L.). Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66:5267-5272. 
Plant Disease / August 2005 795 36. Freeman, S., Shalev, Z., and Katan, J. 2002. 
Survival in soil of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. gloeosporioides pathogenic on straw berry. Plant Dis. 86:965-970. 37. Garcia-Muñoz, J.-A., Súarez, M. B., Gron dona, I., Monte, E., Buddie, A. G., Bridge, P. 
D., and Cannon, P. F. 2000. A physiological and biochemical approach to the systematics of Colletotrichum species pathogenic to straw berry. Mycologia 92:488-498. 38. Gonzalez, E., and Sutton, T. B. 2004. Popula tion diversity within isolates of Colletotrichum spp. causing Glomerella leaf spot and bitter rot of apples in three orchards in North Carolina. 
Plant Dis. 88:1335-1340. 39. Guerber, J. C., and Correll, J. C. 2001. Charac terization of Glomerella acutata, the teleo morph of Colletotrichum acutatum. Mycologia 93:216-229. 40. Guerber, J. C., Liu, B., Correll, J. C., and 
Johnston, P. R. 2003. Characterization of di versity in Colletotrichum acutatum sensu lato by sequence analysis of two gene introns, mtDNA and intron RFLPs, and mating com patibility. Mycologia 95:872-895. 41. Gunnell, P. S., and Gubler, W. D. 1992. Taxon omy and morphology of Colletotrichum spe cies pathogenic to strawberry. Mycologia 84:157-165. 42. Horowitz, S., Freeman, S., and Sharon, A. 2002. Use of green fluorescent protein-trans genic strains to study pathogenic and non pathogenic lifestyles in Colletotrichum acu tatum. Phytopathology 92:743-749. 43. Johnston, P. R. 2000. The importance of phy logeny in understanding host relationships within Colletotrichum. Pages 21-28 in: Colle totrichum: Host Specificity, Pathogenicity, and 
Host-Pathogen Interactions. D. Prusky, M. B. 
Dickman, and S. Freeman, eds. American Phy topathological Society, St. Paul, MN. 44. Johnston, P. R., and Jones, D. 1997. Relation ships among Colletotrichum isolates from fruit-rots assessed using rDNA sequences. My cologia 89:420-430. 45. Jones, A. L., Ehret, G. R., Meyer, M. P., and 
Shane, W. W. 1996. Occurrence of bitter rot on apple in Michigan. Plant Dis. 80:1294-1297. 46. Katsurayama, Y., Boneti, J. I. S., and Becker, 
W. F. 2000. Mancha foliar da Gala: Principal doenca de verāo da cultura da maciera. Ag ropecúaria 13(3):14-19. 47. Lahey, K. A., Yuan, R., Burns, J. K., Ueng, P. 
P., Timmer, L. W., and Chung, K. R. 2004. In duction of phytohormones and differential gene expression in citrus flowers infected by the fungus Colletotrichum acutatum. Mol. 
Plant-Microbe Interact. 17:1394-1401. 48. Lardner, R., Johnston, P. R., Plummer, K. M., and Pearson, M. N. 1999. Morphological and molecular analysis of Colletotrichum acutatum sensu lato. Mycol. Res. 103:275-285. 49. Leandro, L. F. S., Gleason, M. L., Nutter, F. 
W., Jr., Wegulo, S. N., and Dixon, P. M. 2001. 
Germination and sporulation of Colletotrichum acutatum on symptomless strawberry leaves. 
Phytopathology 91:659-664. 50. Leandro, L. F. S., Gleason, M. L., Nutter, F. 
W., Jr., Wegulo, S. N., and Dixon, P. M. 2003. 
Influence of temperature and wetness duration on conidia and appressoria of Colletotrichum acutatum on symptomless strawberry leaves. 
Phytopathology 93:513-520. 51. Leandro, L. F. S., Gleason, M. L., Nutter, F. 
W., Jr., Wegulo, S. N., and Dixon, P. M. 2004. 
Strawberry plant extracts stimulate secondary conidiation by Colletotrichum acutatum on symptomless leaves. Phytopathology 93:1285 1291. 52. Legard, D. 2000. Colletotrichum diseases of strawberries in Florida. Pages 292-299 in: Host 
Specificity, Pathology, and Host-Pathogen In teractions of Colletotrichum. D. Prusky, S. 
Freeman, and M. B. Dickman, eds. American 
Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. 53. Li, W., Yuan, R., Burns, J. K., Timmer, L. W., and Chung, K. R. 2003. Genes for hormone biosynthesis and regulation are highly ex pressed in citrus flowers infected with the fun gus Colletotrichum acutatum, the causal agent of postbloom fruit drop. J. Am. Soc. Hortic. 
Sci. 128:578-583. 54. Lori, G. A., Alippi, A. M., and Dimenna, S. 2004. First report of species of Colletotrichum causing leaf blotch of Liriodendron tulipifera in Argentina. Plant Dis. 88:1381. 55. Lu, G., Cannon, P. F., Reid, A., and Simmons, 
C. M. 2004. Diversity and molecular relation ships of endophytic Colletotrichum isolates from the Iwokrama Forest Reserve, Guyana. 
Mycol. Res. 108:53-63. 56. Maas, J. L., and Howard, C. M. 1985. Varia tion of several anthracnose fungi in virulence to strawberry and apple. Plant Dis. 69:164 166. 57. Madden, L. V., Wilson, L. L., and Ellis, M. A. 1993. Field spread of anthracnose fruit rot of strawberry in relation to ground cover and am bient weather conditions. Plant Dis. 77:861 866. 58. Madden, L. V., Yang, X., and Wilson, L. L. 1996. Effects of rain intensity on splash disper sal of Colletotrichum acutatum. Phytopathol ogy 86:864-874. 59. Manire, C. A., Rhinehart, H. L., Sutton, D. A., 
Thompson, E. H., Rinaldi, M. G., Buck, J. D., and Jacobson, E. 2002. Disseminated mycotic infection caused by Colletotrichum acutatum in Kemp’s Ridley sea turtle (Lepidochelys kempi). J. Clin. Microbiol. 40:4273-4280. 60. Milholland, R. D. 1995. Anthracnose fruit rot (ripe rot). Page 17 in: Compendium of Blue berry and Cranberry Diseases. F. L. Caruso and D. C. Ramsdell, eds. American Phytopa thological Society, St. Paul, MN. 61. Nirenberg, H. I., Feiler, U., and Hagedorn, G. 2002. Description of Colletotrichum lupini comb. nov. in modern terms. Mycologia 94:307-320. 62. Norman, D. J., and Strandberg, J. O. 1997. 
Survival of Colletotrichum acutatum in soil and plant debris of leather leaf fern. Plant Dis. 81:1177-1180. 63. Ntahimpera, N., Wilson, L. L., Ellis, M. A., and Madden, L. V. 1999. Comparison of rain effects on splash dispersal of the Colleto trichum species infecting strawberries. Phyto pathology 89:555-563. 64. O’Connell, R., Perfect, S., Hughes, B., Carza niga, R., Bailey, J., and Green, J. 2000. Dis secting the cell biology of Colletotrichum in fection processes. Pages 57-77 in: Host 
Specificity Pathology and Host-Parasite Inter actions of Colletotrichum. D. Prusky, S. Free man, and M. D. Dickman, eds. American Phy topathological Society, St. Paul, MN. 65. Peres, N. A. R., Kim, S., Beck, H. W., Souza, 
N. L., and Timmer, L. W. 2002. A fungicide application decision (FAD) support system postbloom fruit drop of citrus (PFD). Online. 
Plant Health Progress DOI:10.1094/PHP 2002-0731-01-RV. 66. Peres, N. A. R., Kuramae, E. E., Dias, M. S. 
C., and de Souza, N. L. 2002. Identification of 
Colletotrichum spp. affecting fruit after harvest in Brazil. J. Phytopathol. 150:128-134. 67. Peres, N. A. R., Peever, T. L., Chung, K.-R., and Timmer, L. W. 2003. Molecular characteri zation of isolates of Colletotrichum acutatum causing postbloom fruit drop of citrus and Key lime anthracnose in the Americas. Page 346 in: 
Proc. Congr. Plant Pathol. 8th. Christchurch, 
New Zealand. 68. Peres, N. A. R., Souza, N. L., Peever, T. L., and Timmer, L. W. 2004. Benomyl sensitivity of isolates of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. gloeosporioides from citrus. Plant Dis. 88:125 130. 69. Perfect, S. E., Hughes, H. B., O’Connell, R. J., and Green, J. R. 1999. Colletotrichum: A model for studies on pathology and fungal plant interactions. Fungal Genet. Biol. 27:186 198. 70. Prusky, D., McEvoy, J. L., Leverentz, B., and 
Conway, W. S. 2001. Local modulation of host pH by Colletotrichum species as a mechanism to increase virulence. Mol. Plant-Microbe In teract. 14:1105-1113. 71. Rodriguez, R. J., and Redman, R. S. 2000. 
Colletotrichum as a model system for defining the genetic basis of fungal symbiotic lifestyles. 
Pages 114-130 in: Host Specificity, Pathology, and Host-Pathogen Interactions of Colleto trichum. D. Prusky, S. Freeman, and M. B. 
Dickman, eds. American Phytopathological 
Society, St. Paul, MN. 72. Saha, T., Kumar, A., Ravindran, M., Jacobs, 
K., Roy, B., and Nazeer, M. A. 2002. Identifi cation of Colletotrichum acutatum from rubber using random amplified polymorphic DNAs and ribosomal DNA polymorphisms. Mycol. 
Res. 106:215-221. 73. Shi, Y. L., Correll, J. C., and Guerber, J. C. 1996. Frequency of Colletotrichum species causing bitter rot of apple in the southeastern 
United States. Plant Dis. 80:692-696. 74. Simmonds, J. H. 1965. A study of the species of Colletotrichum causing ripe fruit rots in 
Queensland. Qld. J. Agric. Sci. 22:437-459. 75. Simmonds, J. H. 1968. Type specimens of 
Colletotrichum gloeosporioides var. minor and 
Colletotrichum acutatum. Qld. J. Agric. Sci. 25:178A. 76. Smith, B. J. 1998. Anthracnose leaf spot and irregular spot. Anthracnose fruit rot (black spot). Anthracnose crown rot. Pages 24-25, 31 33, and 46-48 in: Compendium of Strawberry 
Diseases. J. L. Mass, ed. American Phytopa thological Society, St. Paul, MN. 77. Smith, B. J., and Black, L. 1990. Morphologi cal, cultural, and pathogenic variation among 
Colletotrichum species isolated from straw berry. Plant Dis. 74:69-76. 78. Sreenivasaprasad, S., Brown, A. E., and Mills, 
P. R. 1992. DNA sequence variation and inter relationships among Colletotrichum species causing strawberry anthracnose. Physiol. Mol. 
Plant Pathol. 41:265-281. 79. Sreenivasaprasad, S., Mills, P. R., and Brown, 
A. E. 1994. Nucleotide sequence of the rDNA spacer 1 enables identification of isolates of 
Colletotrichum as C. acutatum. Mycol. Res. 98:186-188. 80. Sutton, B. C. 1992. The genus Glomerella and its anamorph Colletotrichum. Pages 523-537 in: Colletotrichum: Biology, Pathology, and 
Control. J. A. Bailey and M. J. Jeger, eds. CAB 
International, Wallingford, UK. 81. Sutton, T. B. 1990. Bitter rot. Pages 15-16 in: 
Compendium of Apple and Pear Diseases. A. 
L. Jones and H. S. Aldwinckle, eds. American 
Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. 82. Talhinhas, P., Sreenivasaprasad, S., Neves
Martins, J., and Oliveira, H. 2002. Genetic and morphological characterization of Colleto trichum acutatum causing anthracnose of lu pins. Phytopathology 92:986-996. 83. Timmer, L. W., Agostini, J. P., Zitko, S. E., and 
Zulfiqar, M. 1994. Postbloom fruit drop of cit rus, an increasingly prevalent disease of citrus in the Americas. Plant Dis. 78:329-334. 84. Timmer, L. W., and Brown, G. E. 2000. Biol ogy and control of anthracnose diseases of cit rus. Pages 300-316 in: Host Specificity, Pa thology, and Host-Pathogen Interactions of 
Colletotrichum. D. Prusky, S. Freeman, and M. 
B. Dickman, eds. American Phytopathological 
Society, St. Paul, MN. 85. Timmer, L. W., Brown, G. E., and Zitko, S. E. 1998. The role of Colletotrichum spp. in post harvest anthracnose of citrus and survival of C. acutatum on fruit. Plant Dis. 82:415-418. 796 Plant Disease / Vol. 89 No. 8 86. Timmer, L. W., and Zitko, S. E. 1996. Evalua tion of a model for prediction of postbloom fruit drop of citrus. Plant Dis. 80:380-383. 87. Ureña-Padilla, A. R., Mitchell, D. J., and Le gard, D. E. 2001. Oversummer survival of in oculum for Colletotrichum crown rot in buried strawberry crown tissue. Plant Dis. 85:750-754. 88. Vaillancourt, L., Du, M., Wang, J., Rollins, J., and Hanau, R. 2000. Genetic analysis of cross fertility between two self-sterile strains of 
Glomerella graminicola. Mycologia 92:430 435. 89. Van der Aa, H. A., Noordeloos, M. E., and De 
Gruyter, J. 1990. Species concepts in some lar ger genera of the Coelomycetes. Stud. Mycol. 32:3-19. 90. Wharton, P. S., and Diéguez-Uribeondo, J. 2004. The biology of Colletotrichum acutatum 
Ann. Jardín Bot. Madrid 61:3-22. 91. Zaitlin, B., Zehr, E. I., and Dean, R. A. 2000. 
Latent infection of peach caused by Colleto trichum gloeosporioides and Colletotrichum acutatum. Can. J. Plant Pathol. 22:224-228. 92. Zulfiqar, M., Brlansky, R. H., and Timmer, L. 
W. 1996. Infection of flower and vegetative tis sues of citrus by Colletotrichum acutatum and 
C. gloeosporioides. Mycologia 88:121-128.  
Dr. Peres is assistant professor of plant pathology at the University of Florida, Gulf Coast Research and 
Education Center in Wimauma. She received her B.S. in agronomy in 1995, an M.S. in horticulture in 1998, and a 
Ph.D. in plant pathology in 2002 at São Paulo State 
University in Botucatu, São Paulo, Brazil. Her dissertation work involved the biology and management of postbloom fruit drop of citrus caused by Colletotrichum acutatum. 
After she received her Ph.D., she worked as program manager for a project on foliar fungal diseases of citrus at the Instituto Biológico in São Paulo until 2003. She joined the faculty at the University of Florida in November 2003. 
Her research program focuses on etiology, epidemiology, and control of anthracnose and other diseases of strawberry and management of ornamental diseases.  
Dr. Timmer is professor of plant pathology at the 
University of Florida. He received his B.S. in botany and plant pathology from Michigan State University and his 
Ph.D. at the University of California at Riverside. He spent two years doing research on citrus diseases in Argentina during his doctoral program. From 1970 to 1978, he did research and extension on citrus diseases at the then 
Texas A&I University Citrus Center (now the Texas A&M 
Kingsville Citrus Center) in Weslaco, TX. Subsequently, he accepted a position with the University of Florida, 
Citrus Research and Education Center in Lake Alfred, where he is currently employed. His research program focuses on fungal diseases of fruit and foliage of citrus trees including etiology, epidemiology, and disease control. For many years, his assignment was 100% research, but it was changed to 70% extension three years ago. Dr. 
Timmer has been active in APS and has served terms as associate and senior editor of Phytopathology and associate editor and, now, senior editor of Plant Disease. He was senior editor of the Compendium of Citrus Diseases and the Citrus 
Health Management book. Pete received the Lee 
Hutchins Award for excellence in research on tropical fruit crops and is a Fellow of APS. 
Dr. Adaskaveg is associate professor of plant pathology at the University of California, Riverside. He received a 
B.S. degree in agronomy in 1982 at the University of 
Connecticut, Storrs, and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in plant pathology at the University of Arizona, Tucson, in 1984 and 1986, respectively. He was a postdoctoral research associate and a research plant pathologist at the 
University of California, Davis, until 1995. Dr. Adaskaveg currently leads a diverse research program on the biology, ecology, epidemiology, and management of pre and postharvest fungal diseases of tree fruit and nut crops in 
California. Part of his research focuses on anthracnose diseases of citrus, almond, and peach. Recent studies have provided new information on the ultra-structure of host– pathogen relationships, pathogen biology, epidemiology of anthracnose, and molecular techniques for the detection and identification of Colletotrichum species and other fungi.  
Dr. Correll is professor of plant pathology at the 
University of Arkansas in Fayetteville. He received his 
B.S. from Pennsylvania State University and his M.S. and 
Ph.D. degrees at the University of California at Berkeley. 
From 1986 to 1989, he was a postdoctoral fellow at 
Kansas State University and University of California, 
Berkeley, and he joined the faculty at the University of 
Arkansas in 1989. His current research program focuses on basic research on the population genetics of fungi such a Pyricularia, Colletotrichum, and Fusarium. He also has a large program dealing with management of diseases of vegetables and rice using cultivar resistance, cultural practices, and chemical and nonchemical methods. He has many international research projects, especially in Asia and Africa, and travels extensively. Dr. 
Correll has been active in APS and has served terms as associate and senior editors of Plant Disease, associate editor of Phytopathology, and currently is senior editor of 
Phytopathology. He has been an invited speaker at many 
APS symposia and has also been active in the 
Mycological Society of America. 
Natalia A. Peres L. W. “Pete” Timmer J. E. Adaskaveg J. C. Correll 