Anthracnose on Strawberry: Its Etiology, Epidemiology, and Pathology, Together with Management Strategies for Strawberry Nurseries: Introduction to the Workshop
E. Barclay Poling
Department of Horticultural Science, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695-7609
Additional Index Words: disease control, detection, Fragaria × ananassa, plugs, alternate hosts
Abstract: In recent years, anthracnose fruit rot (AFR) caused by Colletotrichum acutatum J.H. Simmonds has become an increasingly serious threat to strawberry plant and fruit producers in major strawberry-growing areas of North America. This highly virulent pathogen causes fruit rot, crown rot, root rot, and lesions on petioles and stolons. In fruit-production fields, the best way to control AFR is to prevent the introduction of the pathogen into the field by using anthracnose-free transplants. A critical step in controlling the disease lies in effective nursery management practices. Participants in this workshop outlined several key management strategies, including methods to eliminate pathogen inoculum, cultural practices that reduce host plant susceptibility, and chemical and biological control measures. Industry members stressed the importance of prioritizing research to develop improved methods for nursery field sampling and detection of C. acutatum in asymptomatic plants with latent infections. Rapid and economical diagnosis of C. acutatum in symptomless plant material at each step in the multiyear nursery plant propagation cycle (foundation, registered, and certified plants) will help nursery growers minimize the risk of selling infected transplants to fruit growers.
On 18 July 2004, a workshop was held at the ASHS Annual Meeting in Austin, TX, to address the growing issue faced by commercial nurserymen in North America regarding the control of strawberry plant infections by anthracnose fruit rot (AFR), caused by Colletotrichum acutatum. The workshop brought together nine industry, government, and research experts from North America, representing major strawberry-production regions in the United States and Canada, along with Dr. Stanley Freeman from Israel, recognized internationally for his expertise in the fungus Colletotrichum, one of the most important genera of strawberry pathogens worldwide. The idea to organize this workshop originated from discussions at the Centennial Conference of ASHS in Providence, RI, where concerns were raised about the increasing severity of the AFR pathogen among North American strawberry nurseries and fruit growers. Further discussions occurred at the NCCC-022 Small Fruit and Viticulture Research Group meeting in late October 2003, leading to the decision by Adam Dale, Dan Legard, Tom Sjulin, and myself to organize the workshop for the ASHS Annual Conference in July 2004.
The 4-hour workshop on 18 July 2004 was divided into two parts: 1) Etiology, Epidemiology, and Pathology of Anthracnose on Strawberry; and 2) Anthracnose management strategies.
Management Strategies for Strawberry Nurseries, with particular emphasis on the Anthracnose Fruit Rot (AFR) caused by Colletotrichum acutatum J.H. Simmonds. The workshop also received sponsorship from several organizations, including the California Strawberry Commission, Driscoll Strawberry Associates, Arkansas Strawberry Growers Association, North American Strawberry Growers Association, Ontario Berry Growers Association, and the North Carolina Strawberry Association, Inc. The support from these organizations made it possible for the organizers to invite Dr. Stanley Freeman to the workshop in Austin.
WRITTEN PROCEEDINGS
The four oral presentations in Austin that were subsequently developed into papers for the workshop proceedings include: 1) Epidemiology and Pathology of Strawberry Anthracnose: A North American Perspective (Barbara J. Smith); 2) Management, Survival Strategies, and Host Range of Colletotrichum acutatum on Strawberry (Stanley Freeman); 3) The Role of Micropropagation in Producing Specific Pathogen-tested Plants (Adam Dale, Becky R. Hughes, and Danielle Donnelly); and 4) Special Problems in Nursery Propagation of Day-Neutral Strawberry Cultivars Susceptible to Colletotrichum acutatum (Thomas M. Sjulin).
VIDEO PROVIDES A VALUABLE SUPPLEMENT TO WRITTEN PROCEEDINGS
The discussions in the workshop touched on a number of important subjects and issues, many of which are not covered in the written proceedings. Consequently, the information contained in the video, Anthracnose on Strawberry: Management Strategies for Plant and Runner Tip Nurseries, provides a very valuable supplement to the written proceedings. The oral presentations from the workshop that do not appear in these written proceedings include: 1) Colletotrichum acutatum in Florida strawberry (Jim Mertely, Dan Legard, Natalia Peres, Craig Chandler, and Teresa Seijo); 2) Special considerations regarding strawberry plugs and Colletotrichum acutatum (E. Barclay Poling); 3) Cooperative efforts by the California Strawberry Commission to control Colletotrichum acutatum in strawberry transplants (Dan Legard); 4) The importance of a certification program for strawberry production (Zvezdana Pesic-VanEsbroeck); 5) An effort to get the attention of researchers who work with Colletotrichum acutatum (Curt Gaines); and 6) Maintaining plant quality in strawberry propagation nurseries: a horticulturist’s perspective (Kirk Larson). All of the oral presentations given in Austin were recorded for the video proceedings, with the exception of the talk by USDA researcher and plant pathologist, Dr. Barbara Smith. The video should be of particular interest to researchers, especially breeders, plant pathologists, and molecular geneticists, who wish to understand some of the
HORTSCIENCE VOL. 43(1) FEBRUARY 2008 59
The strawberry industry in the United States required an estimated 928 million plants in 2003. Extension educators and crop consultants who advise commercial strawberry nurseries and fruit growers will particularly appreciate the information in the video provided by Kirk Larson, a pomologist from UC–Davis. He offers practical insights on maintaining plant quality in strawberry propagation nurseries, including the use of hot water dips for nursery plant material. The video is also useful for teachers of plant pathology and small-fruit production courses, as well as for extension-agent training programs. After viewing this video, a good follow-up exercise for agent trainers or classroom instructors is to have students critique the actual production practices of various strawberry nurseries in the United States and Canada that supply plant material to commercial fruit operations in their state, region, or province.
SETTING THE STAGE FOR THE WORKSHOP IN AUSTIN
To my knowledge, this was the first time that scientists and industry leaders from across North America gathered to discuss Anthracnose Fruit Rot (AFR) caused by Colletotrichum acutatum, focusing on strategies to reduce or eliminate this pathogen from North American strawberry farms. The primary goal of the workshop was to identify management strategies to help nursery growers minimize the potential for selling disease-infected transplants to fruit growers. The workshop featured a diverse group, including four active plant pathologists (one from Israel) and two research directors previously trained in plant pathology. Among the horticulturists present were a strawberry breeder from Canada, two strawberry cultural research and extension workers from California and North Carolina, and a nurseryman from California. Nursery grower Curt Gaines, a leader in the California strawberry nursery industry, made significant contributions by candidly analyzing how C. acutatum may be entering the nursery production system. He also urged researchers to prioritize developing improved methods for nursery field sampling and detecting C. acutatum in asymptomatic plants with latent infections.
FRUIT-INDUSTRY SIZE AND ECONOMIC VALUE IN THE UNITED STATES
Many readers may be unaware that the United States is the largest producer of strawberries in the world, accounting for 28% of global supply in 2004. The total value of U.S. strawberry production was estimated at $1.5 billion USD in 2004, with $1.33 billion USD from fresh strawberries and $136 million USD from processed products. California's production was valued at $1.22 billion USD, making up 83% of the total, while Florida contributed mainly winter strawberries, accounting for 11.9% of the total value at $178 million USD. Other significant production states in 2004 included North Carolina and Orego
Total harvested area in the United States was 20,882 hectares (51,600 acres) in 2004, a record high over the last 25 years. California acreage has increased consistently over the last three and a half decades, rising by 200% from 4,452 hectares (11,000 acres) in 1980 to 13,355 hectares (33,000 acres) in 2004. Meanwhile, Florida acreage has increased by 40%, from 2,023 hectares (5,000 acres) in 1982 to 2,832 hectares (7,000 acres) in 2004. Production in California grew from 987 million pounds in 1990 to a record 1.96 billion pounds in 2004, with average yields just under 67 metric tons per hectare (30 tons per acre). In contrast, Florida yields averaged 26 metric tons per hectare (11.5 tons per acre) in 2004, a decrease from a high of 39 metric tons per hectare (17.5 tons per acre) in 2000. Between 2000 and 2003, average yields per hectare in North Carolina fluctuated between 22 and 30 metric tons (10 to 13.5 tons per acre), while in Oregon, yields fluctuated between 22 and 29 metric tons per hectare (10 and 13 tons per acre). In New York, where matted row production is predominant, the production area fluctuated between 567 and 648 hectares (1,400 and 1,600 acres) from 2000 to 2003, with average yields varying from 7 to 10 metric tons per hectare (3.3 to 4.5 tons per acre) during that time.
Isolates of Colletotrichum have likely been disseminated worldwide through international plant exchanges, and Anthracnose Fruit Rot (AFR), caused by C. acutatum, has evolved from a localized but serious disease of strawberries in the hot, humid areas of the southern United States to one of global significance. The greatest losses due to anthracnose on strawberries from AFR are attributed to C. acutatum, making anthracnose diseases of strawberries the second most significant cause of economic losses for strawberry growers in North America, following Botrytis.
The data regarding the U.S. strawberry-harvested area by primary growing system in 2003 reveals that California had 11,980 hectares (29,600 acres) of strawberry plasticulture with an estimated plant usage of 700 million plants. Florida followed with 2,870 hectares (7,100 acres) and 132.8 million plants. North Carolina had 809 hectares (2,000 acres) with an estimated usage of 30 million plants. Other states accounted for 955 hectares (2,360 acres) and 35.4 million plants. The total for strawberry plasticulture was approximately 898.2 million plants. In matted-row and other perennial systems, Michigan, New York, Ohio, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Washington, and Wisconsin had varying harvested areas and plant usages, contributing to a total annual plant use of about 928.5 million plants. This data highlights the significant scale and
Production area in North Carolina reached 809 hectares (2000 acres) in 2003, as reported by S. Toth and B. Poling in their survey of annual strawberry plasticulture states participating in the Methyl Bromide Critical Use Application to the U.S. EPA. Other states with strawberry plasticulture production in 2003 included Virginia (111 ha), Tennessee (71 ha), South Carolina (219 ha), Georgia (101 ha), Arkansas (101 ha), Alabama (61 ha), Ohio (13 ha), New Jersey (81 ha), Kentucky (1 ha), Louisiana (162 ha), Maryland (12 ha), Illinois (13 ha), and Missouri (8 ha). The data was also derived from the aforementioned survey. Estimates of plant usage per hectare for matted rows in these states are based on a standard recommended spacing of 0.6 m by 1.06 m (2 ft by 3.5 ft). Annual planting needs in the matted-row states can be estimated by dividing the total production area by 3, since matted-row beds typically produce fruit for three years (four production seasons).
In terms of economic impact, specific accounts of losses due to C. acutatum infection have been reported. In Florida, losses to anthracnose fruit rot (AFR) have averaged $3 million USD per year in recent years, with losses from fruit rot in 1997-1998 estimated between $10 and $15 million USD. This represents approximately 1.7% of the value of the Florida crop in 2004, which was valued at $178 million USD. In California, anthracnose of strawberries is more prevalent in nursery areas but can pose serious threats in fruit-production areas under favorable conditions. In a workshop presentation, Curt Gaines noted significant outbreaks of C. acutatum in California, including a 2002 AFR epidemic that cost the fruit industry millions of dollars due to contamination throughout all levels of plant production. Kirk Larson highlighted a serious incident in Southern California in 2003 where plugs became infected during the misting and rooting phase of propagation, leading to the destruction of large quantities of expensive plant material.
In North Carolina, the pathogen was highly destructive in plug plant propagation beds and greenhouses in 2003, affecting not only North Carolina but also Virginia, South Carolina, and southern New Jersey. The plasticulture industry in North Carolina, with slightly over 750 hectares in 2003, is much smaller compared to California's 11,980 hectares and Florida's 2870 hectares. C. acutatum was confirmed in plug plants grown from Canadian runner tips in August and September 2003, resulting in the destruction of an estimated 8 million plug plants just days before planting for many affected growers. By the early 1990s, epidemics of AFR had begun occurring in several
University, and Marvin Pritts, Cornell University). Ellis (not a workshop participant) has furnished this background statement: “Actually, in 1991, the disease did not only occur in Ohio; it was epidemic throughout the Northeast and Midwest, from the Mississippi to the Atlantic and from Wisconsin through the lower Midwest. It had never been seen before that time, as far as I know, and I am positive that it was not considered a problem that required control. One grower in Ohio had been growing berries for 40 years and had never seen the disease until 1991, when he lost 2 acres of ‘Lateglow’ strawberries to fruit rot. Eighty-eight percent of the fruit in the planting was infected.” (M. Ellis, personal communication). Marvin Pritts, horticulturist and department chair at Cornell University, also confirmed epidemics of anthracnose fruit rot (AFR) in commercial strawberry fruit plantings in the Northeast, including New York and Pennsylvania (M. Pritts, personal communication). Because one workshop participant directly associated the growth in annual plasticulture production in the United States over the last 20 years with increased fruit losses to Colletotrichum spp., it is instructive to note that C. acutatum losses have also occurred in matted-row plantings and with matted-row cultivars.
As previously noted, in the 1997–1998 winter season in Florida, AFR losses were estimated by Smith to be as high as $10–15 million USD. This comment triggered one of the more interesting discussions of the entire workshop, which related to the importance of having anthracnose-resistant cultivars. Although there seems to be little question about the long-term importance of having disease-resistant cultivars, as emphasized by most presenters, including Freeman, Sjulin, and Smith, there seemed to be considerable doubt about the short-term usefulness of current resistant cultivars, such as the 1992 University of Florida introduction, ‘Sweet Charlie’, which is resistant to AFR. Smith stated in her presentation that losses would have been much more severe in the 1997–1998 Florida strawberry season if 40% of the acreage had not been planted to ‘Sweet Charlie’. However, later in the workshop, Dan Legard, Director of Research and Education at the California Strawberry Commission in Watsonville, CA (who had formerly worked in Florida as a plant pathologist), observed that winter plantings of ‘Sweet Charlie’ were sharply lower in the Florida 1998–1999 season, despite significant losses to AFR in susceptible cultivars from the previous year ($10–15 million USD). Legard went on to say, “Growers don’t grow cultivars for disease resistance; they grow them for yield and marketability and other characteristics. Thus, breeding for resistance is only usable if you actually have high-productive cultivars with good marketable qualities.” The shipping-quality issues with ‘Sweet Charlie’ are well documented. In a more recent publication, The Strawberry: A Book for Growers, Florida researchers acknowledge that “This cultivar in west central Florida is currently in decline due to short shelf-life in warm weather.” In the year 2000, the University of Florida (UF) released the cultivar ‘Strawberry Festival’; this cultivar is widely credited for the Florida industry’s healthy expansion in the early 2000s (Florida ranks second in U.S
Colletotrichum crown rot is caused by Colletotrichum gloeosporioides, while anthracnose fruit rot (AFR) is primarily caused by C. acutatum. A notable cultivar in Florida is Treasure, released in 2000 by a private breeding program, which is well adapted to west-central Florida and resistant to Colletotrichum crown rot (Chandler and Legard, 2003). Most fresh-dug bare-root green transplants for the Florida market are produced in the Canadian provinces of Nova Scotia, Ontario, Prince Edward Island, and Quebec, with smaller quantities from western North Carolina and northern California.
In California, the main nonproprietary short-day cultivar in 2003 was Camarosa, which is susceptible to C. acutatum (Casado-Diaz et al., 2006). Ventana, a more recent introduction by the University of California, has raised concerns about its susceptibility to AFR. Gubler (2005) noted that while C. acutatum was assumed to be the main issue, other factors such as cultivar choice and environmental conditions also influence disease severity. Further research on varietal susceptibility and stressors is necessary to understand the complexities of this phenomenon.
Currently, none of the public or private day-neutral cultivars propagated by California nurseries exhibit resistance to Colletotrichum spp. (Sjulin, 2007). The primary challenge for day-neutral strawberry cultivars, which are vital to the California strawberry industry, is the lack of development of varieties that combine Colletotrichum resistance with acceptable horticultural traits (Sjulin, 2007). In 2003, about one-third of California's nursery production for fruit growers consisted of day-neutral cultivars, with the remainder being short-day types.
California's fruit production in 2004, valued at $1.22 billion, relied almost entirely on plants produced by California nurseries. Estimates indicate that approximately 700,000 plants were produced for the strawberry industry, all of which were susceptible cultivars.
In North Carolina, susceptible short-day cultivars also dominate (809 ha), similar to other mid-South, Mid-Atlantic, and Midwest states that have recently adopted strawberry plasticulture. The most popular cultivar is Chandler (Poling, 2003), which is very susceptible to Colletotrichum spp. Annual plant usage in North Carolina is estimated at around 30 million plants, including approximately 18 million Chandler, which is susceptible to both Colletotrichum crown rot and AFR, as well as 10 million Camarosa and 1.5 million Sweet Charlie, the latter being resistant to AFR but still susceptible to crown rot caused by C. gloeosporioides. Only about 6-7% of the production area in North Carolina is planted with cultivars that are resistant to AFR caused by C. acu
North Carolina participates in a certification program (NC Certified Plants), where plants grown at higher elevations in western North Carolina are primarily fresh-dug bare-root plants raised for fruit growers in Florida, particularly ‘Strawberry Festival’ and ‘Treasure.’
The widespread nature of the pathogen C. acutatum across North America is not entirely understood. However, a significant discovery by Leandro et al. (2001) revealed that C. acutatum can sporulate and germinate on symptomless strawberry leaves. This finding highlights the challenge North American nurserymen face in controlling an “invisible” pathogen in their fields and provides insight into how C. acutatum has become so prevalent since it was first identified in the United States in the mid-1980s by workshop participant Barbara Smith.
Before C. acutatum was identified in North America, it was reported in Queensland, Australia, in the mid-1960s (Smith, 2007). In her paper, “Epidemiology and Pathology of Strawberry Anthracnose,” Smith speculates that C. acutatum had likely been present in the United States for some time under the name Gloeosporium spp. (Maas, 1984). Additionally, a less widely circulated report noted that C. acutatum was found in California strawberries in 1983, causing sporadic disease outbreaks characterized by plant stunting, crown rot, and collapse, particularly in early southern California plantings (Wilhelm, 2004).
At the 1987 North American Strawberry Growers (NASGA) Winter Conference in Nashville, TN, USDA plant pathologist John Maas addressed the implications of C. acutatum in severe anthracnose problems in both the Southeastern United States and Southern California. He emphasized the urgent need for more information on how strawberry cultivars react to various fungi, including C. acutatum (Maas, 1987). Notably, this was 17 years prior to the Anthracnose on Strawberry workshop in Austin, highlighting his foresight regarding the pathogen's potential seriousness. While we now recognize that key nursery areas in the United States and Canada are at risk of C. acutatum infection, limited information was shared during that program about the extent of the pathogen's infiltration in nursery production areas outside California. Its presence in California nursery plant growing areas is well documented (Strand et al., 1994).
The Freeman and Sjulin papers illustrate the most favorable environmental conditions for the spread of this pathogen among nursery plants. Warm and wet weather during strawberry bloom and fruit ripening creates what workshop participant Tom Sjulin describes as “an ideal situation for disastrous infection by Colletotrichum fungi, particularly C. acutatum” (Sj
Plant host susceptibility related to temperature. Workshop participant Stanley Freeman identifies in his paper that conducive temperatures for C. acutatum are in the range of 15–30 °C. It is interesting that Legard noted in his presentation that in California there have been benefits associated with delayed digging of nursery plants (when temperatures are cooler), compared with early-dug transplants for Southern California fruit producers, who can sometimes face more serious problems with anthracnose root rot. Harvesting nursery plants under cooler temperature conditions, as is normally the case in Canada when fresh-dug bare-root plants are collected for North Carolina growers (usually late September through October), may help explain why there have been so few occurrences of anthracnose fruit rot (AFR) in this type of transplant relative to plugs. In contrast, runner tips (used for plug propagation) are harvested about one month earlier than fresh-dug bare-root plants, under temperature conditions that can still be very warm in the northern United States and Canada.
Spores are easily moved through the North American nursery system. Despite the very limited information available at this time describing the extent of this pathogen’s actual areas and path of spread in North America (outside of California), Dale et al. caution that there is now considerable evidence suggesting that the spores are carried on strawberry plants moved by the nursery trade throughout, within, and between countries. This remark references the discovery by Leandro et al. that C. acutatum can be carried on apparently healthy plants to other nurseries and nursery systems. Another troubling implication of the research by Leandro was identified by Stanley Freeman, who sees the formation of secondary conidia on strawberry leaves without penetration as a "mechanism that enables the pathogen to survive and proliferate on different host and non-host leaf surfaces." This raises questions about our understanding of the host range and specificity of C. acutatum obtained from strawberry plants. It may also be important to reconsider whether susceptible hosts are the only way this disease can spread and to explore the role of non-plant surfaces.
Regarding the question of how the pathogen gains entrance to the plant production system, it is known that C. acutatum has a wide host range, but it is not clear whether it enters the system from alternate hosts. Surveys are needed to determine if the pathogen occurs in the vicinity of nursery production. Sjulin reviews recent research of special concern to the California nursery industry regarding outbreaks of C. acutatum on almonds and highbush blueberry, but he concludes that isolates of C. acutatum commonly found on strawberry seem to be distinct from isolates on most other crops except cultivated anemone (Anemone coronaria), and there is little evidence of cross-infection except from anemone.
In her paper, "Epidemiology and Pathology of Strawberry Anthracnose: A North American Perspective," Barbara Smith tested the hypothesis that primary infections in strawberry fields are sometimes assumed to come from other host crops growing nearby. However, her findings did not suggest that primary anthracnose infections in strawberry fields are rarely
C. acutatum from strawberry can survive on several cultivated plant species, such as pepper, eggplant, tomato, bean, and weed species, without causing disease symptoms. This raises the possibility that alternate hosts can serve as potential inoculum reservoirs for strawberry infection between seasons. Further research in North American nursery production areas with a history of C. acutatum outbreaks will better determine whether there is a potential cross-infection issue with alternate hosts. Dale et al. (2007) reinforce the points made by Freeman (2007) and Sjulin (2007), emphasizing that healthy nursery stock plants must be separated from field edges to avoid contamination from wild or weedy hosts. These concerns extend beyond strictly academic interest, as a strawberry nursery grower who follows a stringent regimen of preventative measures—such as starting with clean plant material (Pesic-Van Esbroeck, 2005; Dale et al., 2007; Sjulin, 2007), applying hot water treatment to dormant stock (Gaines, 2005; Larson, 2005; Sjulin, 2007), and conducting soil disinfestation (Dale et al., 2007; Sjulin, 2007)—may still question how much isolation distance is needed from previously infested fields with C. acutatum in their production area. If this question cannot be satisfactorily answered, growers may wonder how much chemical control should be implemented as a preventive measure.
Strobilurons can be effective in controlling strawberry anthracnose, but care must be taken not to overuse these fungicides in the nursery to prevent resistance development in fruit production fields. The control of this pathogen is a high-priority issue for the California strawberry nursery industry. Participants in California (Gaines, 2005; Larson, 2005; Legard; Sjulin, 2007) dedicated significant time to identifying nursery management practices and strategies to help growers minimize the risk of selling C. acutatum-infected transplants to fruit growers. Until the release of resistant cultivars, effective control of C. acutatum in nurseries will require an integrated approach that includes, as Sjulin states, "elimination of inoculum sources, reduction of host plant susceptibility, and either chemical or biological control" (Sjulin, 2007). Hot water therapy is one of the main tools used in California nurseries to control anthracnose in planting stocks (Sjulin, 2007). However, a potential disadvantage of this approach, as mentioned by Freeman (2007), is its unknown long-term effects on plant development and yield. Both Dale (2007) and Pesic-Van Esbroeck (2005) identify micropropagation as a preferred method for eliminating Colletotrichum sp. infections in the initial stock plants used at the beginning of the strawberry propagation cycle, contrasting with hot water therapy. Dale (2007) provides an extensive discussion of protocols used to test for viruses, mycoplasmas, bacteria, and various fungi (including Colletotrichum sp.) in plantlets produced from micropropagation. California workshop participant C. Gaines emphasized a series of integrated steps that nursery managers can employ to minimize potential C. acutatum infections throughout the nursery propagation cycle.
The author summarizes various management strategies used by California nursery growers t
Gaines (2005) and Larson (2005) emphasized the critical importance of removing "free water" in nursery production by utilizing drip irrigation instead of overhead sprinklers. Freeman (2007) elaborated on strawberry cultivation techniques in Israel that employ plastic covers over crops to significantly control the incidence of anthracnose disease by minimizing the spread of inoculum and infection in both nurseries and fruit-production fields.
The urgent need for improved methods of nursery field sampling and detection of C. acutatum in asymptomatic plants with latent infections was highlighted in a memorable presentation by Curt Gaines at an Austin workshop. Formerly a nursery grower, Gaines now serves as the strawberry industry liaison with the Office of Technology Transfer (OTT) at the University of California. Nursery growers require reliable diagnostics to inform their disease-control practices, and Gaines asserted that rapid and cost-effective diagnosis of C. acutatum in symptomless plant material at each stage of the multiyear nursery propagation cycle (foundation, registered, and certified) is essential.
To help reduce, if not eliminate, strawberry anthracnose infection and spread in nursery plants in California and other significant nursery regions in North America, several suggested nursery production practices include:
Nursery Field Considerations:
Proven Practices for Eliminating Primary Inoculum:
Proven Practices for Preventing the Spread of Inoculum:
Practices to Reduce Host Plant Susceptibility:
The author is not aware of any nursery or nursery region in North America that meets all criteria of an "ideal field nursery" scenario. However, some areas, such as an isolated strawberry nursery on Prince Edward Island, Canada, and a new high-elevation nursery in the Rocky Mountains of the United States, fulfill the first criterion of not having a
HORTSCIENCE VOL. 43(1) FEBRUARY 2008 63 plants would greatly assist nursery growers and plant inspectors in minimizing the potential of selling C. acutatum-infected transplants to fruit growers. Gaines felt strongly about this message that, several minutes before the workshop began, he handed me another computer diskette with the same PowerPoint presentation, but a different title. He had changed the title from “An integrated approach to managing Colletotrichum acutatum through the use of meristem plants, nursery isolation, and sanitation measures” to “An effort to get the attention of researchers who work with Colletotrichum acutatum.” We learned in Austin from Dan Legard that the California Strawberry Commission would soon be funding new research projects to determine how important pathogens are introduced and spread in California nurseries, and to develop the tools and methods to detect C. acutatum to prevent its introduction and spread in the nursery.
FINAL REFLECTIONS
Hopefully, the video and written proceedings of this workshop will motivate other scientists, industry members, and representatives from different North American strawberry systems to engage in a more meaningful future dialogue on questions related to the overall health of the North American strawberry plant supply. Unfortunately, we now know that isolates of Colletotrichum have probably been disseminated worldwide through international plant exchanges and that anthracnose, caused by C. acutatum, has become widely spread across North America since it was first diagnosed in the United States in the mid-1980s by workshop participant Barbara Smith. Sadly, we cannot turn back the clock by two decades and impose a North American quarantine on C. acutatum, as the Europeans have done. The fact that this pathogen has so many new addresses in the United States and Canada today indicates that the overall nursery system in North America needs substantial improvement. Dale et al. conclude their paper with an appeal for a better North American nursery system process to address Colletotrichum infections and to inevitably bring about common standards of health and sanitation. They note that eradication of Colletotrichum infections will depend on considerable cooperation and openness between the different nursery systems in North America. Nursery system representatives could benefit from exchanging information, as we did in Austin, on current research to propagate strawberry nursery stock plants free of C. acutatum infection and to identify reliable methods of keeping specific pathogen tested plants free of Colletotrichum spp. beyond the screenhouse stage in the nursery propagation cycle, which is where most infections of nursery stock occur. We did not have adequate time in Austin to discuss how future cooperation between different nursery, research, extension, and certification systems in Nor
Regulatory programs for the certification of plant materials have historically been slow to change (Nelson-Kluk, 2006). However, as new technology for detecting C. acutatum in asymptomatic nursery plants becomes available (hopefully in the near future), it would be appropriate to convene members of the North American nursery system not only to discuss the utilization of these diagnostic tools but also to address issues related to appropriate field-sampling strategies for C. acutatum (Legard, 2005). Some of the leading publicly supported services within the North American Strawberry Nursery System include the University of California’s Foundation Plant Services, the North Carolina Micropropagation Center (and NC Certified Plant Growers), and Canadian services such as those described by Dale et al. (2007). Organizations directly involved in issues related to "common standards of health and sanitation" (Dale et al., 2007) include various state Departments of Agriculture in the United States and their provincial counterparts in Canada (Ministries of Agriculture), which are responsible for plant protection, certification, and regulatory matters.
Breeding strawberry cultivars that combine resistance to Colletotrichum spp. with good horticultural characteristics and market acceptance remains a significant challenge. Part of the difficulty may be due to the high level of diversity in the pathogen population (Legard et al., 2003). However, when an intensive seedling screening process is applied for crown rot resistance and seedling populations are segregated for fruit rot resistance, it is possible to develop resistant strawberry cultivars, such as Pelican, which is resistant to both fruit and crown rot (Smith et al., 1998). Planting resistant cultivars, such as Carmine and
19–25. In: N.F. Childers (ed.). The strawberry: a book for growers, others. Dr. Norman F. Childers Publications, Gainesville, FL. Dale, A., B. Hughes, and D. Donnelly. 2008. The role of micropropagation in producing specific pathogen-tested plants. HortScience 43:74–77. Freeman, S. 2008. Management, survival strategies, and host range of Colletotrichum acutatum on strawberry. HortScience 43:66–68. Gaines, C. 2005. An effort to get the attention of researchers who work with Colletotrichum acutatum. In: Anthracnose on strawberry. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sci., Video Workshop Series, Disk 2. ASHS, Alexandria, VA. Larson, K. 2005. Maintaining plant quality in strawberry propagation nurseries: a horticulturist’s perspective. In: Anthracnose on strawberry. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sci., Video Workshop Series, Disk 2. ASHS, Alexandria, VA. Leandro, L.F.S., M.L. Gleason, F.W. Nutter, Jr., S.N. Wegulo, and P.M. Dixon. 2001. Germination and sporulation of Colletotrichum acutatum on symptomless strawberry leaves. Phytopathology 91:659–664. Legard, D. 2005. Cooperative efforts by the California Strawberry Commission to control Colletotrichum acutatum in strawberry transplants. In: Anthracnose on strawberry. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sci., Video Workshop Series, Disk 2. ASHS, Alexandria, VA. Legard, D., M. Ellis, C. Chandler, and J. Price. 2004. Integrated management of strawberry diseases in winter fruit production areas. In: N.F. Smith (ed.). The strawberry: a book for growers, others. Dr. Norman F. Childers Publications, Gainesville, FL. Maas, J.L. 1984. Anthracnose fruit rot (black spot). In: J.L. Maas (ed.). Compendium of strawberry diseases. American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. Mass, J.L. 1987. Anthracnose diseases of strawberry. In: E.E. Burns and E.J. Burns (eds.). Proceedings 1987 Winter Conference, North American Strawberry Growers Association, Madrid, NY. Mertely, J.C. and N.A. Peres. 2005. Anthracnose fruit rot of strawberry. Doc. PP207. Plant Pathology Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service, Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences (IFAS), University of Florida. Mertely, J.C. and N.A. Peres. 2005. Speci
Smith, B.J., C.L. Gupton, G.J. Galletta, J.L. Maas, J.M. Enns, and J.R. Ballington, Jr., R.J. Constantin, T.J. DiVittorio, and D. Himelrick. 1998. ‘Pelican’ strawberry. HortScience 33(6): 1082–1084. Strand, L. 1994. Anthracnose—Colletotrichum acutatum, pp. 90–91. In: Integrated pest management of strawberries. Publication 3351. Regents of the University of California, Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Oakland, CA. Wilhelm, S. 1984. Anthracnose disease of strawberries identified in California, Jan. 25. Calif. Strawberry Advisory Board, Watsonville, CA. HORTSCIENCE VOL. 43(1) FEBRUARY 2008 65.
