Control of Colletotrichum acutatum in Strawberry Under Laboratory, Greenhouse, and Field Conditions
Species of the fungal plant pathogen Colletotrichum are responsible for strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa Duch.) anthracnose, one of the major diseases affecting this crop. Major species causing strawberry anthracnose include C. acutatum J. H. Simmons, C. fragariae Brooks, and C. gloeosporioides (Penz.) Penz. & Sacc. Symptoms of the disease manifest in various phases. Infection of mother plants with anthracnose can lead to the collapse of the entire plant due to crown rot. In nurseries, lesions form on stolons, eventually girdling the runners, causing unrooted daughter plants distal to the lesion to wilt and die. The death of daughter plants in both nurseries and field transplants can also be attributed to crown rot. Infected transplants can spread the disease from the nursery to the field. In strawberry fruit production fields, entire crops can be destroyed by anthracnose under conducive environmental and cultural conditions. Leaves, flowers, and both green and ripe fruit may be extremely susceptible to anthracnose, potentially resulting in total fruit loss in some cases. In central Brazil, a recent epidemic of anthracnose resulted in significant yield loss, ranging from 30% to 68%. Severe outbreaks of strawberry anthracnose were observed in many strawberry-growing nurseries in Israel during May to September in 1995 and 1996. Following transplantation, entire beds of strawberry plants collapsed in the field due to crown rot, with C. acutatum identified as the causal agent. Recently, various molecular techniques have been utilized to accurately identify the species of Colletotrichum causing strawberry anthracnose. The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) method was employed to verify that more than 100 Israeli isolates are from the species C. acutatum. Fungicide application for the control of strawberry anthracnose is limited due to restrictions on pesticide usage and the susceptibility of strawberry plants to Colletotrichum during all developmental stages, including flowers and green and ripe fruit. Anthracnose infection in plant nurseries can be mitigated by producing disease-free propagation material, which is essential for establishing disease-free nursery transplants. Control measures practiced in the United States rely on frequent applications of the protectant fungicides captan and thiram. However, benzimidazole fungicides are not effective due to the common occurrence of resistant Colletotrichum strains. Certain fungicides, including propiconazole, have been reported to successfully limit in vitro growth of C. fragariae, and fluazinam, a protectant fungicide, provides good control of strawberry anthracnose in post-harvest berries. In this study, we evaluated the fungicides prochloraz-Zn, prochloraz-Mn (both protectant sterol-biosynthesis inhibitors), captan, folpet, a combined formulation of prochloraz-Zn and folpet, propiconazole, difenoconazole, and a heat treatment for the control of C. acutatum in naturally infected strawberry plants under laboratory, greenhouse, and field conditions. Fungicides were applied at the transplant stage to determine whether a single-dip treatment is sufficient for disease control.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Fungal cultures and plant material.
Three isolates of C. acutatum from naturally infected strawberry (cv. Oso Grande) plants (TUT-40A from stolons, TUT-112A from fruit, and TUT-127A from roots) were used in this study. Isolates were maintained on modified Mathur’s medium (MS) at 25°C in the dark. Cultivars Ofra, Malach (clone 156), and Hadas (clone 543), which are susceptible to strawberry anthracnose and were naturally infected with C. acutatum, were used in laboratory, greenhouse, and field experiments.
In vitro fungicide assays were conducted using fungicide-amended petri plates (9-cm diameter) to assess the activity of captan, folpet, prochloraz Zn, prochloraz-Mn, combined prochloraz-Zn and folpet, propiconazole, and difenoconazole against C. acutatum. Mycelial disks (5-mm diameter, removed from the margins of 4- to 5-day-old cultures) were transferred to MS amended with the tested fungicides at various concentrations, from 0 to 500 µg/ml. Radial growth of the mycelium was measured periodically to determine percent control. The effective dose causing 50% inhibition of mycelial growth (ED50) was determined for each fungicide.
Various fungicides and a heat treatment were assessed for their ability to control strawberry anthracnose caused by the fungus Colletotrichum acutatum under laboratory, greenhouse, and field conditions. The effective doses causing 50% inhibition of mycelial growth (ED50) were 30.5, 12.2, 0.2, 0.15, 0.05, 0.07, and 0.05 µg/ml for the fungicides folpet, captan, propiconazole, difenoconazole, combined prochloraz-Zn/folpet, prochloraz-Zn, and prochloraz-Mn, respectively.
In laboratory experiments, infection in segments of strawberry runners treated with prochloraz-Zn reached 60%, which was significantly reduced compared to combined prochloraz-Zn/folpet (90%), captan, folpet, and water controls (100%). In the greenhouse, the number of naturally infected transplants killed was significantly reduced by all fungicides and the heat treatment (5 min at 49°C) compared to the non-treated control. Prochloraz-Zn was the most effective chemical control treatment but did not differ significantly from the heat treatment.
In field experiments conducted during 1995 and 1996, the numbers of naturally infected strawberry transplants killed were significantly reduced by all fungicide treatments relative to the non-treated control. The percent reduction of transplant mortality in the field was 93.3%, 93.1%, 66.7%, 37.7%, and 29.1% for prochloraz-Mn, prochloraz-Zn, combined prochloraz-Zn/folpet, propiconazole, and difenoconazole, respectively. The effective dose causing 50% inhibition of mycelial growth (ED50) was calculated by log/probit transformation of percent control. The experiment was conducted twice using each of the three C. acutatum isolates. Similar results were reproduced, and thus data were pooled. Because no significant differences
Control of C. acutatum in naturally infected strawberry runners involved segmenting naturally infected strawberry runners (cv. Hadas) into 1.5-cm sections, which were surface-disinfested for 30 seconds in 3% sodium hypochlorite. The segments were then submerged for 1 minute in sterile tap water (untreated control) or in an aqueous solution of the following fungicides: captan (2.5 g/liter), prochloraz-Zn (1 g/liter), folpet (4 g/liter), or a combination of prochloraz-Zn (1 g/liter) and folpet (4 g/liter). Similar concentrations of prochloraz have previously been used to control almond anthracnose caused by C. gloeosporioides. The runner segments were dried on sterile Whatman filter paper and plated on MS supplemented with 2.5 µg (a.i.) iprodione (Rovral 50WP, Rhone Poulenc Inc., Lyons, France) per milliliter to reduce contaminating fungi. Each treatment consisted of 25 segments, with five segments per plate. Control efficacy was evaluated by assessing the growth of C. acutatum from the disinfested, fungicide-treated runners. The proportion of runner segments exhibiting visible growth of C. acutatum was monitored over 12 days. The experiment was conducted three times, and the data were pooled. Evaluations of captan and folpet were discontinued in greenhouse and field experiments due to the high concentrations required and their limited success in mycelial inhibition and pathogen control under laboratory conditions.
Control of C. acutatum in naturally infected strawberry transplants in the greenhouse was assessed using various fungicides and a heat treatment, routinely applied in California, United States. Transplants were submerged for 10 minutes in tap water (non-treated control) or in aqueous solutions of prochloraz-Zn (1 g/liter), combined prochloraz-Zn (1 g/liter) and folpet (4 g/liter), propiconazole (2.5 g/liter), or difenoconazole (2.5 g/liter). Additionally, a heat treatment involved submerging transplants for 5 minutes in a heated water bath at 49°C. Following treatment, plants were potted in an 11-cm-diameter pot with a vermiculite/peat soilless mix (1:1, vol/vol). They were maintained under supplementary incandescent light for a 12-hour photoperiod in the greenhouse at 25°C and watered daily as necessary. Each treatment included 25 plants arranged in a randomized design. Disease incidence was expressed as percent transplant mortality after 6 weeks. This experiment was conducted four times, and data were pooled.
Control of C. acutatum in naturally infected field transplants was evaluated in the Sharon region in 1995 and in the Lev Hasharon region in 1996. Transplants were submerged for 10 minutes in tap water, prochloraz-Mn (1 g/liter), prochloraz-Zn (1 g/liter), a combination of prochloraz-Zn (1 g/liter) and folpet (4 g/liter), propiconazole (2.5 g/liter), or difenoconazole (2.5 g/liter). In the 1995 experiment, treated transplants (cv. Malach) were planted in a randomized design in the field on October 2, with four replicates of 32 plants each per treatment. The percentage of plants killed was assessed 34 days later, on November 5. In the 1996 experiment, treated transplants (cv. Ofra) were planted in a randomized design in the field on September 18, with five replicates of 50 plants each per treatment. Percent plant mortality was assessed 20 days later, on October 7. Both field experiments were terminated before complete mortality of the plants in the control plots to provide farmers adequate time to fumigate the soil and replant healthy plants. Mean separation of the data was analyzed u
Prochloraz-Zn and prochloraz-Mn, whether alone or in combination with folpet, were the most effective fungicides in inhibiting Colletotrichum acutatum in vitro. A twofold to threefold concentration of the -azole fungicides and an approximately 200- to 500-fold concentration of captan and folpet were required for 50% fungal growth inhibition relative to that required for the prochloraz fungicides.
The effective dose of various fungicides causing 50% inhibition (ED50) of Colletotrichum acutatum in vitro was as follows: Folpet (30.455 ± 5.6 µg/ml), Captan (12.225 ± 2.3 µg/ml), Propiconazole (0.199 ± 0.05 µg/ml), Difenoconazole (0.156 ± 0.05 µg/ml), Prochloraz-Zn/Folpet (0.053 ± 0.012 µg/ml), Prochloraz-Zn (0.077 ± 0.023 µg/ml), and Prochloraz-Mn (0.054 ± 0.017 µg/ml).
Control of C. acutatum in infected strawberry runners showed that results from naturally infected runners resembled those from the in vitro experiments. Captan and folpet had little or no effect on controlling C. acutatum. However, survival of the fungus in runners was significantly reduced by prochloraz-Zn and the combined prochloraz-Zn/folpet fungicides compared to the other treatments and the non-treated control throughout the experiment. After 12 days, recovery of C. acutatum from runners treated with prochloraz-Zn reached 60%, significantly lower than that observed with the combined prochloraz-Zn/folpet fungicide and other treatments, including the water control (90% to 100% infection).
In the greenhouse, mortality of transplants caused by C. acutatum was significantly reduced by all fungicides and by the heat treatment relative to the non-treated control. Prochloraz-Zn was the most effective treatment (85.6% control) but did not differ significantly from the heat treatment (75.6% control). Prochloraz-Zn/folpet (50.6% control), propiconazole (33.8% control), and difenoconazole (28.8% control) were less effective than prochloraz-Zn and the heat treatment in reducing plant mortality. It should be noted that the prochloraz fungicides, difenoconazole, and propiconazole caused slight phytotoxicity, manifested by mild stunting and scorching of leaves.
In field transplants, mortality caused by C. acutatum in naturally infected strawberry transplants was significantly reduced by all fungicide treatments compared to the non-treated control during both the 1995 and 1996 field trials. Prochloraz-Mn and prochloraz-Zn alone were the most effective in reducing transplant mortality among the tested fungicides. The reduction of transplant mortality in 1995 using prochloraz-Mn was 93.3%, while in 1996, the reductions for prochloraz-Mn (86.8%) and prochloraz-Zn (93.1%) did not differ significantly. Prochloraz-Zn/folpet, propiconazole, and difenoconazole were less effective than prochloraz alone. In 1995, transplant mortality was reduced by 66.7% and 37.7% using prochloraz-Zn/folpet and propiconazole, respectively. Similarly, in 1996, transplant mortality was reduced by 52.9% and 29.1% using prochloraz-Zn/folpet and difenoconazole, respectively. As with the greenhouse experiments, the prochloraz fungicides, difenoconazole, and propiconazole were slightly phytotoxic.
High concentrations of the protectant fungicides captan and folpet were not effective in vitro and failed to control the disease in naturally infected runners. Their use in further greenhouse and field experiments was therefore not considered. The -azole fungicides, propiconazole and difenoconazole, were effective in reducing in vitro growth of C. acutatum. However, prochloraz in two forms, prochloraz-Zn and prochloraz-Mn, as well as a combined prochloraz-Zn/folpet formulation, were two to three times more effective in inhibiting in vitro growth of the pathogen. This prompted us to proceed with in vivo studies using the -azole and prochloraz fungicides for control of C. acutatum in naturally infected plant material. In greenhouse and field studies, prochloraz-Mn and prochloraz-Zn alone were highly effective in controlling the pathogen in naturally infected plant material, as was the prochloraz-Zn/folpet formulation, albeit to a lesser extent. It should be noted that the combined treatment was also less effective than prochloraz alone in disease control under laboratory conditions, despite the fact that the prochloraz concentration in the combined formulation was equivalent to that of prochloraz alone. This may be attributed to an antagonistic effect of folpet in the formulation, which interfered with the fungicidal activity of prochloraz. Although propiconazole has been reported to inhibit C. fragariae in vitro, it was not sufficiently effective in our experiments. Prochloraz was effective in controlling strawberry anthracnose under all tested conditions; however, this fungicide under the current formulation had a residual taste effect on strawberries (S. Freeman and S. Dotan, unpublished data). Therefore, prochloraz should be thoroughly tested before widespread use in strawberry fruiting fields. Additional caution should be taken regarding resistance or tolerance of C. acutatum and other species of Colletotrichum to prochloraz in particular, and to other fungicides in general. Isolates of C. kahawae, which are usually highly sensitive to prochloraz, have been shown to acquire tolerance to this fungicide in culture. Similarly, isolates of C. acutatum from various hosts (including strawberry) were resistant to benzimidazole fungicides, as compared to the sensitivity of C. gloeosporioides isolates. A standard heat treatment (5 min at 49°C) of bare-rooted transplants for nursery use is practiced in the United States for the control of foliar nematodes and anthracnose of strawberry. In this study, the same heat treatment had no visible detrimental effect on transplants and was very effective in reducing percent mortality caused by C. acutatum. However, heat treatment may be detrimental to plant vigor and should not be used if transplants are destined for production fields. Although heat treatment may be a welcome alternative to chemi
Means are the average plant mortality from four experiments, each containing 25 plants per treatment. Mortality was assessed 6 weeks after planting. The percent mortality of strawberry transplants caused by Colletotrichum acutatum in the field during the years 1995 and 1996 is as follows: In 1995, the control group had a mortality rate of 70.3%, while the Prochloraz-Zn/Folpet treatment had a mortality rate of 23.4%. The Prochloraz-Zn treatment showed significantly lower mortality at 5.2%, while Prochloraz-Mn had a mortality rate of 4.7% in 1996. Other treatments, such as Propiconazole, resulted in a mortality rate of 43.8% in 1995 and Difenoconazole showed a mortality rate of 53.6% in 1996. The least significant difference (LSD) for 1995 was 22.8 and for 1996 was 13.6.
Mortality was assessed 34 days after transplanting in 1995 and 21 days in 1996. Transplants were dipped for 10 minutes in the following treatments: control (tap water), prochloraz-Mn (1 g/liter), prochloraz-Zn (1 g/liter), combined prochloraz-Zn (1 g/liter) and folpet (4 g/liter), difenoconazole (2.5 g/liter), and propiconazole (2.5 g/liter). Means represent the average transplant mortality from four replicates of 32 plants each in 1995 and five replicates of 50 plants each in 1996 per treatment. The LSD was calculated according to Fisher’s protected test at P < 0.05.
In the first 3 to 4 weeks following transplantation, the plants that died were routinely replaced by new transplants. This delay in fruit production results in significant revenue loss, as the fruit does not reach European markets before January. Consequently, single-dip prochloraz treatments, both during nursery establishment and at the transplant stages, have become standard practice for farmers in Israel, regardless of visible anthracnose symptoms. Strawberry root necrosis caused by C. acutatum, leading to stunting, chlorosis, and plant mortality, has become an increasing problem in Israel. These dip treatments are likely to expose infected root tissues to prochloraz and contribute to the reduction of disease incidence. Furthermore, single-dip treatments have minimal environmental impact since entire fields are not sprayed after planting. Although mild prochloraz phytotoxicity was observed, crop yield does not appear to be affected.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially supported by grant No. 132-0967-96 from the Chief Scientist, Israel Ministry of Agriculture, and grant No. 132-0922-96 from the Vegetable Growers Association, awarded to S. Freeman. We thank D. Shtienberg for critically reviewing this manuscript.
LITERATURE CITED
