Crop pests and pathogens move poleward in a warming world
Article in Nature Climate Change · September 2013 DOI: 10.1038/nclimate1990
CITATIONS 903 READS 3,063
3 authors, including: Daniel P. Bebber, University of Exeter; Sarah Jane Gurr, University of Exeter.
All content following this page was uploaded by Sarah Jane Gurr on 17 February 2014. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
LETTERS PUBLISHED ONLINE: 1 SEPTEMBER 2013 | DOI: 10.1038/NCLIMATE1990
Crop pests and pathogens move polewards in a warming world. Daniel P. Bebber, Mark A. T. Ramotowski, and Sarah J. Gurr.
Global food security is threatened by the emergence and spread of crop pests and pathogens. Spread is facilitated primarily by human transportation, but there is increasing concern that climate change allows establishment in previously unsuitable regions. However, interactions between climate change, crops, and pests are complex, and the extent to which crop pests and pathogens have altered their latitudinal ranges in response to global warming is largely unknown. Here, we demonstrate an average poleward shift of 2.7±0.8 km per year since 1960 in observations of hundreds of pests and pathogens, with significant variation in trends among taxonomic groups. Observational bias, where developed countries at high latitudes detect pests earlier than developing countries at low latitudes, could result in an apparent shift towards the Equator. The observed positive latitudinal trends in many taxa support the hypothesis of global warming-driven pest movement. Since crop domestication 10,000 years ago, farmers have been plagued by numerous pests and pathogens (hereafter termed pests) causing starvation and social upheaval. Classic examples include the 1840s Irish potato famine caused by the oomycete Phytophthora infestans and the 1943 Great Bengal Famine due to the fungus Helminthosporium oryzae. The threat persists. Between 10% and 16% of crop production is lost to pests, with similar losses post-harvest. Indeed, losses of major crops to fungi and oomycetes alone amount to enough to feed 8.5% of today’s population. The diversity of crop pests is daunting, including fungi, bacteria, viruses, viroids, oomycetes, insects, and nematodes, and continues to expand through the evolution and dissemination of new pathotypes. Recently emerged strains of the rusts Puccinia graminis and P. striiformis are among the most virulent and rapidly spreading pathogens ever seen, and a new and invasive lineage of P. infestans has rapidly displaced other late blight genotypes. Dissemination occurs through both natural and anthropogenic processes, facilitated by the increasing interconnectedness of the global food chain. More than half of all emerging plant diseases are spread by introduction. Weather is the second most important factor. For example, fusarium head blight of wheat has re-emerged in the USA, favored by warm, wet weather at anthesis. Insect pests are also influenced by weather, with chewing insects responding negatively to drought and borers positively. Warming generally stimulates insect herbivory at higher latitudes, primarily through increased winter survival, as seen in mountain pine beetle (Dendroctonus ponderosae) outbreaks in the US Pacific Northwest. The effects of weather are dependent on both host and pest responses. For example, drought stress can decrease plant resistance, but infection probability is lower in dry conditions. Although pests are spread by human activities and aerial dispersal, prevailing climatic conditions are likely to determine their subsequent establishment and growth. The influence of weather on crop disease has led to speculation about the effects of anthropogenic climate change on global food security. Projections are complicated by the interacting influences of increasing atmospheric CO2 concentrations, changing climatic regimes, altered frequency and intensity of extreme weather events, and differing responses of the plant and its enemies.
However, a general pattern of increasing latitudinal range with mean global temperature is anticipated, either through direct effects of climate change on pests or on the availability of host crops. Latitudinal shifts in species distributions, as organisms track temperature optima, have been detected in thousands of wild populations. However, a comprehensive analysis of latitudinal range shifts of crop pests has not been attempted until now. Here, we undertake this analysis using published observations of 612 crop pests and pathogens. The data were investigated for the presence of observational biases caused by latitudinal gradients in the abilities of countries to detect, identify, and report pests, as well as latitudinal trends in observations for individual pest species. Identification of reporting biases is central to analyzing latitudinal trends in pest observation. The earliest observation for a particular pest in a specific region is equal to the true date of arrival plus a delay due to observation, identification, reporting, and selection of a reliable record for inclusion in the database. In a regression of the latitude of observation against observation date, the regression coefficient will be positive if there is an observed increase over time, negative if there is a decrease, and statistically undifferentiated from zero if no trend is detected. A bias will arise if the delay period is related to latitude. Scientific and technical capacity are greater for countries at high latitudes, and these countries also report more pests. Therefore, countries at high latitudes should report earlier than those at low latitudes, and the regression coefficient of latitude on year of observation should be negative in the absence of any real latitudinal trend in observations. Two-thirds of pests were observed either solely in the Northern Hemisphere (restricted above 23.4°N) or in northern and tropical zones (between 23.4°S and 3.4°N) for the first decade of observations. Around one-tenth of the pests were found solely outside the tropics, and another tenth within the tropics, with the remainder being global (in both tropical and extra-tropical zones). Only two pests were restricted to the south (below 23.4°S). By the end of the observation period, more than half were global in distribution, a third were either northern or northern and tropical, and less than one-tenth of the pests were restricted to tropical or tropical and southern zones. Of those originally restricted to the tropics, more than two-thirds spread out, most becoming global. Of those originally found outside the tropics, half were later found in the tropics. The latitudinal range (the difference between the most-northerly and most-southerly known latitudes) for a pest in a given year increased roughly linearly with the longitudinal range. However, this occurred more rapidly over smaller ranges, such that, on average, the rate of increase was approximately equal for latitude and longitude.
Latitudinal trends in observations varied greatly among individual pest species, but when considering all species together, significant positive latitudinal trends were detected. For Northern Hemisphere observations, the Acari, Bacteria, Coleoptera, Diptera, Fungi, Hemiptera, Isoptera, Lepidoptera, and Oomycota showed increased detection towards the north since 1960. In contrast, Nematoda and viruses exhibited the opposite trend, moving towards the Equator. Randomization tests indicated that no trend should be detected if no temporal pattern were present. Linear mixed-effects models of country (or region) latitude against the year of first observation revealed an average poleward shift in recorded incidences of 2.7 ± 0.8 km per year since 1960 for both hemispheres combined. In the Northern Hemisphere, this shift was 2.2 ± 0.8 km per year, while in the Southern Hemisphere, it was 1.7 ± 1.7 km per year.
Linear mixed-effects models were also fitted to detect average trends within pest species or pathotypes. For all pests combined, the mean latitudinal shifts were not significant, likely due to large variability among pest groups. Throughout the years, observations of Coleoptera and Lepidoptera shifted north in the Northern Hemisphere, whereas Nematoda and viruses shifted south. From 1960 onwards, Acari, Coleoptera, Fungi, Hemiptera, and Lepidoptera moved north, while Nematoda and viruses shifted south towards the Equator. After accounting for multiple comparisons, significant trends were found in a few pests. From 1960 onwards, 12 pests (ten of which were fungi) showed significant trends towards the Equator, and 17 pests (six of which were nematodes) exhibited trends away.
The results indicate significant positive latitudinal shifts for many important groups of crop pests and pathogens. Overall, there has been a significant trend of increasing numbers of pest and pathogen observations at higher latitudes, globally and in both the Northern and Southern hemispheres. The mean shift in detection since 1960 (26.6 km per decade) is more rapid than that reported for many wild species (17.6 km per decade) but is nearly identical to that expected due to temperature changes (27.3 km per decade). Latitudinal variation in countries’ abilities to report pests may bias the data towards earlier detection at higher latitudes. Therefore, the positive trends cannot be solely explained by variations in the ability to detect pathogens. Overall trends in new observations could include increased detection probabilities at high latitudes unrelated to factors such as gross domestic product (GDP), or result from real shifts in pests that have not yet been detected at lower latitudes. Consequently, models for mean shifts within species were also fitted. Within-species shifts were significant for some groups, particularly mobile invertebrate pests such as Lepidoptera, Coleoptera, and Hemiptera.
Fungi. The viruses and nematodes showed clear observational shifts towards the Equator. Both viruses and nematodes lack the means for airborne dispersal, and the trend could therefore be due to trade alone, whereas the aerially dispersed groups exhibit poleward shifts. Other possibilities are that viruses and nematodes are difficult to identify in the field, being soil-borne, and their symptoms may potentially be misidentified as abiotic stresses. Therefore, reporting bias due to latitudinal variation in scientific and technical capacity could explain these negative trends. It is likely that movements of wild species are hampered by habitat fragmentation, dispersal limitation, and, in some cases, long generation times. A climatic debt can be incurred, whereby species do not move as rapidly as expected given shifting climatic regimes. In contrast, pathogens have evolved to disperse and grow rapidly, and their spread is facilitated by the global trade in seeds and agricultural produce. It is likely that anthropogenic and aerial dispersal continuously introduces pathogens to new areas, and in many cases, only inclement weather prevents their establishment in a new habitat. As such, an unwanted assisted colonization program is taking place for plant pests and pathogens. Observed changes in pest distributions accord with observations of wild species, direct responses of pests to warming, and expectations for expanding pest ranges under climate change. Although recent climate change is implicated as an important driver of these observations, other factors could bias the results. New crop varieties and agricultural technologies have extended the agricultural margin northward in the USA, and deforestation has increased production in the tropics, thus providing new opportunities for pest invasions at high and low latitudes. Correlations between land use change and climate change can obscure analyses based on species temperature ranges. Range expansions could be biased in one direction if equatorial barriers, such as the Sahara desert, were more restrictive to pest movement than poleward barriers such as permafrost. However, randomization tests demonstrated that no latitudinal shift would be expected in the absence of a directional temporal trend. Although factors such as land use change do influence species distributions, the influence of such confounding factors decreases in large-scale studies, and detecting climate signals in noisy data is unlikely in the absence of real climate drivers. Global food security is dependent on numerous physical, agronomic, and socioeconomic factors. There is little doubt, however, that climate change and its effects on plant health will increasingly threaten human populations, particularly those living in poorer regions. We have shown that reported observations of hundreds of pests and pathogens are consistent with the hypothesis of climate change drivers, contrary to the hypothesis of greater detection capability in developed countries.
Although countries at higher latitudes are better able to monitor and manage emerging pests and diseases, these countries also tend to have the greatest productivity per unit land area, and the threat to food security is troubling. If climate change will make it easier for crop-destroying organisms to spread, renewed efforts to monitor the occurrence of pests and diseases and control their transport will be critical in addressing this growing threat to global food security.
Methods: The latitudes and dates of the earliest records of 612 crop pests and pathogens were abstracted from two exhaustive historical databases—the CABI Distribution Maps of Plant Pests and Plant Diseases. Pest observations were conducted at the country level, and regionally for some large countries (USA, Brazil, India, China, Japan, Russia, and Australia); therefore, latitudes of country or region centroids were used in analyses to determine whether the latitude of new observations has changed significantly over time and whether any shift was consistent either with observational bias or with the expected effects of climate change. The presence of a record for a particular geographical region in a given year depends on numerous factors, including the presence of the pest, occurrence at a detectable and economically significant level, and the scientific and technical capacity to sample, identify, and publish a report in a source abstracted by CABI. The data are therefore likely to suffer from strong observational bias. When considering the potential impact of climate change on crop pest distributions, any observational bias linked to latitude must be investigated. Let L be the latitude of the earliest observation, and Do be the year of the earliest observation in the map. Do is not the date of arrival but includes both the delay in reporting and selection of a record for the map, that is, Do = Da + Dd, where Da is the true date of arrival, and Dd is a random variable describing the delay between arrival and reporting in the map. If there has been a real latitudinal shift in pest distributions, we propose a relationship E(L) ∼ aDa, where the coefficient a is positive. Estimation of a will be biased if the delay in observation varies with latitude.
E(Dd)∼ bL, such that E(L)∼ aDa+bL, where b is non-zero. If b is positive, then regression of L on D0 will overestimate a, and if b is negative, then the regression will underestimate a. In other words, if countries at higher latitudes delay reporting longer than those at low latitudes, it will seem as though pests arrived at higher latitudes later, and a poleward latitudinal shift could be erroneously inferred. Conversely, if countries at low latitudes report later, the situation is reversed, and a latitudinal shift towards the Equator would be inferred. Based on known biases in species observational capacity towards higher latitudes, the correlation between per capita GDP and scientific capacity, increases in per capita GDP with latitude, and an increase in pest detection numbers with latitude, we infer that countries at higher latitudes are likely to have better pest detection capacity, meaning that Dd is smaller and b < 0. Therefore, the likely bias in observational capacity means that a positive latitudinal shift in observations is unlikely in the absence of a real climate change signal. The data were tested for the presence of non-Gaussian errors and spatial autocorrelation before applying linear mixed-effects models and generalized additive mixed models to estimate latitudinal shifts in observations across the entire data set, taxonomic groups, and individual species. Linear mixed-effects models on 1,000 randomizations of year against latitude, with pest as a random effect, were used to remove any temporal trend in the pest observations and thereby determine the latitudinal shift expected in the absence of a global trend such as climate change. The latitudes of the centroids of countries or regions were utilized in the analysis. Randomization tests yielded an expected latitudinal shift of −0.011±0.017 km yr−1, indicating no significant shift under the null hypothesis of no temporal trend affecting pest observations. Full methods are described in the Supplementary Information.
Received 15 December 2012; accepted 31 July 2013; published online 1 September 2013.
References:
