RESEARCH ARTICLE
Direct Splash Dispersal Prevails over Indirect and Subsequent Spread during Rains in Colletotrichum gloeosporioides Infecting Yams
Laurent Penet*, Sébastien Guyader, Dalila Pétra, Michèle Salles, François Bussière
INRA, UR1321, ASTRO Agrosystèmes tropicaux, F-97170, Petit-Bourg (Guadeloupe), France, *laurent.penet@antilles.inra.fr
Abstract
Plant pathogens have evolved various dispersal mechanisms, utilizing biotic or abiotic vectors or a combination of both. Rain splash dispersal is known for various fungi and can effectively drive crop epidemics, allowing infectious strains to propagate rapidly among often genetically homogenous neighboring plants. However, splash dispersal is primarily a local process, with spores typically not moving more than a few decimeters from their source. In this study, we assessed the rain splash dispersal of conidia from the yam anthracnose agent, Colletotrichum gloeosporioides, in an experimental setting using a rain simulator, focusing on the impact of soil contamination (i.e., the effect of re-splashing events). Spores were dispersed up to 50 cm from yam leaf inoculum sources, with a notable exponential decrease in dispersal as distance increased. While few spores were dispersed via re-splashing from spore-contaminated soil, the proportion of spores deposited through this mechanism increased with distance from the initial source. We found no carryover of soil contamination from previous rains, indicating that re-splashing from contaminated soils primarily occurred within individual rain events. We conclude that most dispersal occurs via direct splashing, with a lesser contribution from indirect dispersal through re-splashing.
Introduction
Aerial dispersal of microbes and fungal spores was first described in the late nineteenth century and subsequently developed into its own branch of biology. The impact of climate on aerial dispersal was recognized early on, particularly regarding factors such as mist, fog, rain, and wind.
Fungal species differ greatly in their ability to disperse through the air, and these differences may be related to their dispersal structures that impact the different steps of dispersal: takeoff, distance traveled, and landing. Two major types of rain dispersal can be distinguished: “dry dispersal” (i.e., drops dislodge spores at impact but do not hydrate them) and “wet dispersal,” where spores are hydrated before they are dispersed by raindrops or splashes on plants or the ground. “Dry” dispersal generally occurs as a single event, while “wet” dispersal may occur recurrently via re-splashes. Wind will increase primary rain dispersal distance in a downwind direction and decrease it upwind, but it is generally accepted that wind dispersal distances are longer than rain dispersal alone, and that pure splash dispersal is mostly local. Despite this limitation, splash dispersal may still be particularly efficient when host plant species occur at high densities, making it especially well-suited for crop pathogens with large patches of host plants growing in often pure, high-density stands. Since dispersal is a key process in pathogen life cycles, distance traveled from the source is one of the main focuses of epidemiological studies. Even if rain-splash dispersal is a rather local process, it is important to understand how rain characteristics influence the distance traveled by spores via splashing. Indeed, splash dispersal may vary with rain intensity, duration and frequency, size and velocity of falling drops, and the wash-off of spores just dispersed. Usually, rain intensity does not increase dispersal rate per se, but it may enhance spore release and thus the total number of spores dispersed and the probability of long-distance dispersal events. On the other hand, more intense rain may decrease effective dispersal by washing off spores just dispersed, meaning that intensive rains may not always translate into increased rates of pathogen dispersal. In contrast, drop size may be more important than rain intensity, with bigger drops being more efficient in spore displacement by splash. In still air, splashes can disperse spores up to about 70 cm, and models demonstrate that the detailed mechanism of water splashing is best described as a function of inertia between impacting drops and surface tension at the point of impact. Interface interactions between chemical and physical properties of spores and water will also likely influence dispersal rate, but little is known specifically about this at a biological level. Environmental factors other than rain, splash, and spore characteristics will also increase or impede dispersal locally: for example, soil nature, soil cover, plant canopy, and host density all have strong effects on spore dispersal by splashes. First, vegetation may act as a barrier, putting neighboring hosts beyond reach. Indeed, ground cover has been shown to limit splash dispersal efficiently, with neighboring canopy leaves reducing dispersal by 90% compared to bare ground, and the presence of weeds is estimated to decrease overall dispersal distance by half. Splash dispersal also varies within canopy stages, with dispersal from the upper sides of leaves causing infection at the tips of leaves while direct dispersal from the source prevails over indirect rain-splash spread.
Infection at the base of leaves can be caused by splashes from the lower side. Moreover, splashing effects vary within and among species. Secondly, soil topography and composition greatly affect splash dispersal. For example, mulch or straw cover reduces dispersal more than plastic sheet cover, even on sloping ground; however, recurrent lateral and backward splashes can still move spores uphill. Dispersal may further differ between soils of varying wetness, as spores dispersed from a focal source are more numerous in inundated soils than in bare soils. Surprisingly, few studies have investigated the potential effect of prior rains and ground contamination on splash dispersal. It is known that spores present in muddy soils can be splashed further during rains, as documented in natural settings, but little is known about the effect of prior soil contamination on splash dispersal. In this study, we assessed rain splash dispersal of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides (Penz.) Penz. and Sacc conidia in an experimental setting using a rain simulator, with emphasis on the re-splash of spores from prior soil contamination. We asked the following questions: What is the relative importance of initial direct splashing and re-splashing in local pathogen dispersal? Can spores from prior ground contamination be dispersed by a subsequent rain?
Colletotrichum gloeosporioides (Penz.) Penz. and Sacc is a species complex of fungi that are mostly plant pathogens, though they are also reported as harmless endophytes in a few cases. These fungi attack many crop species worldwide. In the Greater Yam (Dioscorea alata L.), C. gloeosporioides causes anthracnose disease, resulting in leaf decay during infection. Conidia are dispersed locally by rains and infect further leaves of neighboring plants, sometimes leading to severe epidemics that result in significant economic losses in a crop already subject to high variation in yield. In this experiment, we used C. gloeosporioides strain #220 from our lab. This strain is of Guadeloupean origin; it was isolated in 1999 on the D. alata variety Kabusah and demonstrates moderate virulence on most common local yam varieties. This strain bears a diagnostic PCR fragment of C. gloeosporioides, amplified using specific primers. For spore multiplication, spores were first grown on a DPDA media, and then conidia were diluted in water and sprayed onto cut leaves of the highly susceptible yam D. alata var. Plimbite. Infected leaves were placed in a water-sprayed plastic bag and left for incubation for four days at room temperature until the leaves exhibited the characteristics of heavy anthracnose infection.
Dispersal experiments were conducted to investigate rain splash efficiency using artificial simulated rain for each assay. The rain was produced for two minutes using a Deltalab Microprocessor Controlled Spray System, developed to simulate rain in still air.
Rainfall was simulated by a constant speed oscillating nozzle positioned at a height of 2.50 m, with a sweep angle of 120˚ and water pressure at the nozzle orifice set to 62 kPa. Inoculum sources consisted of infected yam leaf fragments with sporulating necroses placed in Petri dishes containing 10 mL distilled water and Cotton Blue, which were prepared five minutes prior to the runs to stain the spores. These Petri dishes were positioned at the center of the rain assay within a conic tent that had a 30 cm diameter opening at the top. The ground surface inside the tent was covered with rough paper sheets (plain "Joseph" paper grade 551), which were replaced every two runs. This setup allowed for non-contaminated soil treatment during odd-numbered runs and soils with first rain contamination during even-numbered runs. For each run, 60 plain microscope slides were arranged in concentric circles around the spore source at specific distances of 24, 31, 38, and 45 cm from the source. Experimental rain diluted the inoculum sources, with an average of 8 mL of rainwater falling into the Petri dishes. Despite this dilution, the spores remained heavily stained, allowing for a clear distinction between directly dispersed spores (blue-stained) and indirectly dispersed spores via re-splash (rinsed, colorless).
Spore counts were conducted to estimate spore concentrations in the inoculum source before (initial spore solution) and after the rain treatment (residual spore solution, accounting for dilution). The initial spore solution was not controlled for variation in spore concentration, but concentration was included as a covariate in the analyses. The range for the twelve runs was between 2.68–5.92 × 10^5 spores/mL, with a mean concentration of 4.06 × 10^5 spores/mL. The total number of exported spores was estimated for each run, and ground contamination was assessed as the number of exported spores remaining between runs. Ground contamination was calculated as the difference in spore number before and after rain, correcting for dilution due to rain. The estimated range for exported spores and soil contamination was between 1.62–4.95 × 10^5 spores/mL. Slides were randomly selected for each run and stratified by distance sampled; only two slides at the 24 cm distance were counted due to heavy contamination, while four slides were counted for all other distances. Spores were counted using light transmission microscopy, with whole slide counts. Distinguishing between individual drops on slides from all dispersal distances was straightforward; thus, drops and spores per drop were counted. Blue drops contained blue-stained spores (directly dispersed from the Cotton Blue-stained Petri dish), while pale or colorless spores were derived from rinsed drops (dispersed via re-splashing from the ground). A total of 174 slides from 12 runs were analyzed, with six runs conducted withou
To avoid pseudo-replication issues for slides within runs, we directly worked on means at the run level. We first conducted a two-way full factorial ANOVA in R to test whether the number of drops dispersed to slides changed with distance from the petri dish spore source and whether this change differed between directly dispersed blue drops and rinsed, secondarily dispersed colorless drops. Second, we ran an ANCOVA to test the effect of distance and type of dispersal (primary or secondary, assessed from the color of drops) on mean spore number per drop, with initial spore concentration and previous soil contamination as covariates. We added interaction terms between the color of drops and distance to account for the potential impact of inoculum source on direct dispersal (blue drops) and of prior soil contamination on indirect dispersal (washed drops). Third, we conducted an analysis of covariance to test the impact of distance and source of dispersal (color of drops) on total spores dispersed, with initial spore concentration and previous soil contamination as covariates. We added interaction terms between the color of drops and distance to account for the potential impact of inoculum source on direct dispersal (blue drops) and of prior soil contamination on indirect dispersal (washed drops) and the differential impact of spores within the experiment.
The experimental setup for artificial rain involved a conic tent with an opening of 30 cm in diameter to channel the rain. Inoculum sources, which included Petri dishes with Cotton Blue solution and spores, were positioned at the center of the rain zone. Microscope slides were arranged in concentric circles around each source, placed at distances ranging from 24 to 45 cm. The slides received spores either directly from rain splash from the source (blue drop spores) or indirectly via re-splashes from the ground (clear drop spores). The assumptions of homoscedasticity and normality of residuals were met in all analyses.
We used path analysis modeling to examine the effect of distance on direct and indirect dispersal and how the different modes of dispersal (primary and secondary) influence the total number of spores dispersed. Path analysis is a regression method that tests a priori predetermined subsamples of all possible correlations between covariates to focus on specific hypotheses of direct and indirect dependence between them. We conducted these analyses using the specified data.
PROC REG and PROC CALIS, using structural equation modeling, covariance matrices, and estimating path gradients with maximum likelihood, were employed. Prior to the analysis, data were checked, and extreme outliers were identified using Cook’s D values. Eight data points, all above 10,000, were recognized as exceedingly deviant from the rest of the dataset and were discarded from further analyses. Independent variables exhibited leptokurtic L-shaped curves; therefore, Box-Cox transformations were applied. We utilized the AID package in R to determine the best exponent for each variable, which were 0.17, 0.3, and 0.38 for the number of blue drops, mean spore number per blue drop, and mean spore number per rinsed drop, respectively.
We initially investigated a full model comprising three exogenous variables (distance, exported spores, and prior soil contamination) and four endogenous variables (number of blue drops, mean spore number per blue drop, number of washed drops, and mean spore number per washed drop). The analysis examined the effects of distance and exported spores on all subsequent endogenous covariates, in addition to the effect of prior soil contamination on the number of rinsed drops and the mean spore number per rinsed drop. The initial model also included the effects of drop numbers on mean spore number per drop (blue and washed, respectively) and the further impacts of these four covariates on total spores dispersed. The number of rinsed drops was significantly correlated to the error term in mean spore number per rinsed drop; consequently, this covariate was removed from the model to avoid issues with multicollinearity and dependencies among covariances. We further eliminated paths with non-significant impacts on total spores dispersed and covariates without significant effects (exported spores and prior soil contamination) to develop a minimal model with appropriately fitting covariance matrices, with the exception of mean spore number per rinsed drop.
Once the best model was identified, several fit indices were assessed. Given the moderate sample size (N = 166), we adhered to Hu and Bentler’s recommendation to prioritize SMRSR over RMSEA among indices of model fit, as RMSEA tends to produce many type-one errors, rejecting true population models. We reported diverse fit indices following Hooper's recommendations for path reports. The retained path model had a Chi-squared value of 3.35 (2df, P = 0.187), indicating that the model covariance matrix did not significantly differ from the data covariance matrix, despite the “distance” factor deviating from a normal distribution. As noted in the SEM and path literature, Chi-squared may suffer from a lack of power and could be inadequate due to our moderate sample size. Following Hooper’s suggested fit index reporting, the RMSEA estimate was 0.064 (95% CI = 0–0.18), slightly above the recommended conservative rejection threshold for fair fit. Given the maximum likelihood method utilized here and the moderate sample size (N = 166), we adhered to Hu & Bentler’s suggestion to use SMRSR instead. The SMRSR for the retained model was good (0.025), and the Bentler Comparative Fit Index was very good (0.995).
Results indicated a much greater dispersal via direct dispersal from the source, with re-splashing contributing only weakly to local dispersal, although its contribution increased at greater distances, thereby enhancing the probability of infection of neighboring plants in fields. Prior ground contamination, however, had no significant impact on further dispersal by rain, suggesting no carryover of spores between rainfalls.
Drop number decreased with distance from the source, and as expected, this effect was more pronounced for direct splashing from the inoculum source (blue drops) than for re-splash (rinsed drops), indicating a significant interaction between distance and drop color. Re-splash drops are pushed forward sequentially during the rain. Indeed, drop distribution varies between short distances—such as 24 and 31 cm (with a higher number of drops since this zone receives drops both from rain and re-splashes)—and greater distances, like 38 and 45 cm, where drop numbers were lower. Consequently, while direct splashes from the inoculum source contributed significantly to the total number of drops at short distances, re-splash drop numbers contributed more to the total at 45 cm. Despite this greater contribution of re-splash at long distances, the average spore numbers per drop were always greater in blue drops, and the number of spores dispersed indirectly via rinsed drops declined with distance, remaining relatively constant in blue drops. Overall, most spore deposition was via direct splashes (blue drops), even if the difference between direct and indirect dispersal decreased with distance. Both direct splashing and indirect re-splashing contributed to dispersal, with a significant interaction between distance and drop color observed. The interaction between distance and drop color was also highly significant, with mean spore number per rinsed drops always decreasing with distance, while mean spore number per blue drops plateaued after 24 cm.
The study presents findings on the effects of distance, source of dispersal (with blue drops representing direct dispersal and rinsed drops indicating indirect dispersal), and their interactions on dispersal parameters: A) Number of Drops, B) Mean Spore Number per Drop, and C) Total Spores Dispersed. The analysis emphasizes significance through P-values. The results indicate that distance and the interaction with color significantly affected all three parameters, highlighting the dominance of direct dispersal in spore distribution.
Mean spore number per drop and total spore dispersed were significantly affected by distance (decreasing dispersal) and by the source of dispersal (drop color), but were not impacted by initial spore solution concentration nor by levels of prior soil contamination. This suggests that re-splashes are probably less sensitive to the number of spores available for dispersal in either leaf inoculum or contaminated ground, and may be more sensitive to the physical properties of rain and drops (not evaluated in the present study). Therefore, spores previously dispersed do not significantly contribute to further dispersal with subsequent rains. Contamination mostly occurs via direct splashing or re-splashes within single rain events.
Path analysis showed that distance, number of blue drops, and mean spore number per blue drop had a highly significant impact on dispersal, while mean spores per rinsed drop had a weaker and insignificant impact in our path model, possibly due to its interaction with distance. All components of spore dispersal, especially the measure of direct dispersal (number of blue drops), decreased with increasing distance from the spore source. Mean spore number per blue drop had the strongest impact on dispersal and was more important than the number of blue drops (path gradients of 0.48 vs. 0.19, respectively), making it the major driver of spore dispersal. Interestingly, the number of blue drops was negatively correlated with mean spore number per blue drop (-0.36), indicating that increased opportunities for direct dispersal did not necessarily result in a global increase in spores dispersed. Incident drops may have broken into several smaller droplets, each containing fewer spores, though this was not investigated in the present study.
We found that splash dispersal is primarily a local process occurring at small distances, with direct dispersal dominating indirect re-splash, the latter contributing only minimally in our experiment. Previous ground contamination contributed little to dispersal via re-splashing, so dispersal mostly occurs within single rain events. Direct dispersal from a spore source had the greatest effect because more spores were dispersed in single drops, even if indirect dispersal via re-splash contributed relatively more drops at greater distances. Only a few spores were displaced via re-splashing, resulting in fewer spores dispersed. In the following discussion, we will relate these findings to their impact on dispersal by rains, both in the context of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides infecting yams and in a more general context of splash dispersal.
Rain splash is known to occur at very small scales and results in shorter dispersal distances than wind. Our experiment did not investigate the full range of splashing dispersal, but our results confirm that a majority of spores dispersed by rain are released at short distances from the inoculum. Since direct dispersal is heavily dependent on chance events, we would expect re-splashing events, which allow for further propagation of released spores, to eventually become more important for dispersal than direct splashes. Our design allowed us to compare these two components of dispersal (direct splash and indirect via re-splashes), and we found that indirect dispersal does not exceed direct dispersal because direct splashes carried a dramatically greater number of spores per drop compared to re-splashed drops. This is the first study comparing the efficiency of direct versus indirect dispersal, so we cannot ascertain if other species behave similarly. Species of Colletotrichum differ in direct splash dispersal efficiency as a function of distance, probably due to differences in the mucilage matrix.
In our experimental setting, we examined the path of spore dispersal via splashing. The direct effects are represented with dashed lines indicating negative path coefficients and solid lines representing positive path coefficients. The significance of path gradients is indicated below the standardized regression value, with "NS" signifying non-significant results and P values otherwise. The path sizes are drawn proportionally to the standardized values of the gradients, including unexplained variance for endogenous variables.
Direct dispersal from the source prevails over indirect rainsplash spread. Properties of Colletotrichum may also lead to differential abilities to disperse via re-splash, for instance, if variation in spore size or shape impacts dispersal capacity, or if differences in cell wall hydrophilic properties affect adherence to forming splashes. In the context of yam cropping, ridge interspacing falls within the direct dispersal distance. Ridges may therefore intercept direct splashes and also decrease re-splash efficiency, while staking further increases the chances of intercepting direct drops. Both agronomic practices focus on productivity management (maximizing space and concentrating production), but they also facilitate the direct dispersal of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides. Consequently, the pressure to evolve re-splash dispersal efficiency is reduced. It would be interesting to test whether re-splash dispersal ability varies across pathogen species in different cropping systems.
Soil characteristics can impact splashing dispersal in two ways: first, during indirect dispersal via re-splash during rains, and second, through indirect dispersal in subsequent rain events due to prior contamination. While our experimental ground surface was a rough paper sheet and would not realistically compare to natural soils, it likely behaved more as a dispersal enhancer than natural soils because of its low drainage capacity. Indeed, the experimental ground became saturated and could not absorb water quickly after the rains began, forming a water film rapidly. Re-splash during rains could have been facilitated by this low clearance and quick film formation. The effect of re-splash in our experiment was low compared to direct dispersal from an inoculum source, but success in dispersal only requires a single spore to contaminate a new host. Thus, indirect dispersal may still provide a means to establish in new hosts. While secondary to direct splashing, re-splashing may indeed remain a significant source of spore contamination
It would be important to investigate the effect of different soil characteristics on pathogen dispersal compared to other factors such as plant cover that is known to influence splash dispersal. Indeed, little is known about how soil characteristics influence the splash dispersal of spores. Because there is limited knowledge about soil contributions to rain dispersal of pathogens, further experiments should address the diversity of soil clearance ability and microtopography and their consequences on dispersal.
Secondly, prior soil contamination had no detectable effect on spore dispersal in our experiment, meaning the presence of spores dispersed during previous rain did not noticeably increase spore loads in the following rain event. Perhaps the spore density on the ground surface was too low to impact re-splash, or deposited spores were trapped on the surface. This could occur under natural conditions, particularly if spores become bound to humus compounds. The paper sheets we used were highly fibrous and might compare to humus-rich or mulched soils concerning such trapping or retention effects. However, if other soil types have different soil retention capacities, our lack of re-splash effects could be an artifact of the paper used, which may not generalize to most crop conditions. It is also possible that the retention effect is strong regardless of the nature of the soil, and few spores can be remobilized in subsequent rains. Several studies emphasize the importance of takeoff, but there might be a cost to landing and deposition whenever spores are not placed on a suitable host, leading to significant spore loss after direct dispersal, especially losses preventing indirect further dispersal by re-splash.
Colletotrichum gloeosporioides is known to have very low survival in soils, even when settling in decaying plant pieces, though they may survive longer on plant residues. We would thus expect dispersal to be successful only if dispersed spores quickly land on a new host. The inability of this pathogen to survive outside its host is likely a key factor determining the apparent weak impact of soil contamination on further splash dispersal.
In summary, we demonstrated that direct dispersal from a source is the main mode of spore dispersal by rain-splashes and that indirect dispersal via re-splash has a smaller impact but can still contribute somewhat to spore contamination. However, rain splash dispersal is limited to single rain events, and once spores have settled, subsequent rains do not seem to promote further dispersal; prior soil contamination was not an important factor in spore dispersal in Colletotrichum gloeosporioides. While both rain and cover characteristics are known to impact rain splash dispersal, little is known about soil characteristics or diversity in pathogen dispersal abilities via splashing, and we suggest this is a gap to fill in further experiments to increase our understanding of rain splash.
Supporting Information: The experiment dataset includes measurements such as distance in centimeters and various counts related to drops and spores. Specific parameters include the total number of drops, the number of white and blue drops, total number of spores, and the number of white and blue spores, all expressed in spore numbers. O
Collin and Jacqui Shykoff for comments on earlier versions of the manuscript, and two anonymous reviewers for comments that greatly improved the manuscript. Direct dispersal from source prevails over indirect rainsplash spread. Author contributions: Conceived and designed the experiments: LP, MS. Performed the experiments: LP, MS. Analyzed the data: LP, SG, DP, FB. Wrote the paper: LP, SG, MS, DP, FB.
References:
Effects of surface topography and rain intensity on splash dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum were studied by Yang et al. (1990), revealing significant insights into phytopathology. Ripoche et al. (2008) examined the survival of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides, the causal agent of yam anthracnose, on decomposing yam residues in soil. Their findings highlighted the importance of environmental factors in pathogen persistence. Additionally, Freeman et al. (2002) investigated the survival of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. gloeosporioides in soil, which are both pathogenic to strawberries, contributing to the understanding of disease management in crops.
In the study, the direct dispersal from the source was found to prevail over indirect rainsplash spread, emphasizing the mechanisms of pathogen transmission in agricultural contexts.
