Nitrogen Fertilizer Affects the Severity of Anthracnose Crown Rot Disease of Greenhouse Grown Strawberries
Barbara J. Smith, Research Plant Pathologist, USDA-ARS, Thad Cochran Southern Horticultural Laboratory, Small Fruit Research Unit, P.O. Box 287, Poplarville, MS 39470
Corresponding author: Barbara J. Smith.
Abstract
The influence of nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium on the severity of anthracnose crown rot was evaluated in three greenhouse studies. Strawberry plants were fertilized three times weekly with a modified Hoagland's Nutrient Solution containing the treatments and inoculated eight weeks after treatment applications began with a conidial suspension of the causal pathogen, Colletotrichum fragariae. Disease severity was rated 30 days later on a scale of 0 (no symptoms) to 6 (plant dead). In the first study, the effect of N, P, and K levels was evaluated using 16 treatments: eight N levels with either low P and K or high P and K. Disease severity ratings and percent foliar N increased as N level increased but were not influenced by the level of P and K. In two other experiments, seven N sources were each evaluated at three levels. Plants receiving 160 ppm N had higher disease severity ratings than plants receiving 0 or 40 ppm N. Among plants receiving 160 ppm N, those treated with Ca(NO3)2 had the least disease. When N fertilizer is applied to strawberry plants as Ca(NO3)2, anthracnose crown rot severity should be less severe than when N is applied in ammonium forms.
Introduction
Anthracnose crown rot, caused by the fungus Colletotrichum fragariae, may infect all above-ground parts of the strawberry plant. Petiole and stolon infections are characterized by dark sunken lesions, while leaf infections present as small black leaf spots. When the fungus infects the crown, wilt and rapid plant death often follow. Internal symptoms of a crown infection include red discoloration of the crown, usually extending in a “V” shape from the side of the crown toward the center. Colletotrichum gloeosporioides and C. acutatum also cause anthracnose diseases in strawberries. In the southeastern United States, anthracnose crown rot and fruit rot can be severe in strawberry production fields where Colletotrichum species often spread rapidly during wet harvest seasons, sometimes causing total crop loss. Fungicides are used to control anthracnose diseases, but several are no longer effective due to the development of fungicide-tolerant strains of the pathogens.
Field observations in Florida showed that growing strawberry plants in soils with low N levels reduced the severity of anthracnose, but fruit production was also severely reduced. The form of nitrogen and calcium levels are both known to influence disease severity. For example, calcium has been used to control soil-borne diseases caused by Pythium species on various crops, and nitrate forms of nitrogen were shown to suppress Fusarium wilt in tomatoes, whereas ammonium forms increased disease severity. However, the effect of nitrogen on disease management varies with the disease. Ammonium sulfate was shown to be more suppressive of black root rot of strawberries than Ca(NO3)2. The objectives of these studies were to determine (i) the influence of N, P, and K levels; and (ii) the influence of N so
Cultures of C. fragariae isolate CF-63 were initiated from silica gel cultures maintained at USDA-ARS in Poplarville, MS, and grown on potato dextrose agar-oatmeal agar (1:1, v
) under continuous fluorescent light at room temperature (20 to 28°C). Conidial suspensions used for inoculations were prepared from 7 to 14-day-old cultures. Inoculum was prepared by flooding each culture plate with sterile deionized water and gently scraping the agar surface with a glass rod to remove conidia. The resulting conidial suspension was filtered through cheesecloth, and the final conidial suspension was adjusted to a concentration of 1.5 × 10^6 conidia/mL. A hand pump sprayer was used to apply the inoculum as a mist uniformly over the foliage of the plants to the point of runoff. Inoculated plants were immediately placed in a dew chamber at 100% relative humidity and 30°C for 48 hours, and then transferred to a greenhouse for 5 weeks, maintaining a temperature of 22 ± 7°C. Plants of the strawberry cultivar Tangi and four clones from the USDA-ARS breeding program (MSUS 37, MSUS 74, MSUS 70, MSUS 98) were grown in pasteurized sand, with one plant per 10-cm plastic pot in a greenhouse (20 ± 7°C). Within each experiment, plants of each strawberry clone were randomly assigned to nitrogen treatment. Test nutrients were prepared in a modified Hoagland's Nutrient Solution containing (NH4)2SO4 or NH4NO3, NaH2PO4·H2O, KCl, CaCl2·2H2O, MgSO4·7H2O, iron as Fe-chelate, MnCl2·4H2O, ZnSO4·7H2O, CuSO4·5H2O, H3BO3, CoCl2·6H2O, and MoO3. Fifty mL of a treatment solution was applied three times weekly to each pot. Pots were watered with tap water on alternate days and flushed with excess water once a week. Eight weeks after the initiation of treatment applications, all plants in an experiment were inoculated with a suspension of C. fragariae conidia, incubated in a dew chamber for 48 hours, and then held in the greenhouse.
Inoculated plants were evaluated for disease severity 30 days after inoculation on a scale of 0 (no symptoms) to 6 (plant dead). Rating categories were as follows: 0 = plant with no visible lesions; 1 = plant with petiole lesions < 3 mm long; 2 = plant with petiole lesions 3 to 10 mm long; 3 = plant with petiole lesions > 10 to 20 mm long; 4 = plant with petiole lesions > 20 mm long; 5 = plant whose youngest leaf wilted with or without petiole lesions; and 6 = dead plant with necrotic crown. An average disease rating of 2.0 or less was considered a resistant response, an average rating of 4.0 or greater was considered a susceptible response, and an average rating between 2.1 and 3.9 was considered an intermediate response.
The effect of nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K) levels was evaluated using 16 treatments. Eight N levels (0, 5, 10, 20, 40, 80, 160, and 320 ppm N) were applied as NH4NO3 with either low P and K (8.7 ppm P and 16.6 ppm K) or high P and K (35.8 ppm P and 66.4 ppm K). Phosphorus was applied as NaH2PO4, and potassium was applied as KCl. The design was a randomized complete block with five replications of each of three strawberry clones (MSUS 37, MSUS 70, and MSUS 98). After fiv
Data Analysis
For all analyses, disease severity data were first transformed by adding 0.5 to the disease severity rating and then calculating the square root. Statistical analyses were performed using a SAS package. When the F values were significant, mean comparisons were determined by the least significant difference value at P = 0.05. Regression analysis was used to determine the relationship between nitrogen treatment levels and disease ratings, foliar nitrogen content, and photosynthesis rates.
Effect of Nitrogen, Phosphorus, and Potassium Levels
Disease ratings. Disease severity ratings increased as treatment nitrogen levels increased. When averaged across all treatments, ‘MSUS 37’ plants had higher disease severity ratings than ‘MSUS 70’ and ‘MSUS 98’ plants, but all three were in the intermediately susceptible range. The highest disease severity ratings were observed in plants receiving the highest levels of nitrogen, while the lowest scores were from plants receiving 40 ppm nitrogen or less. The factors of phosphorus and potassium levels, their interaction with nitrogen levels, and the interaction between strawberry clones and fertility treatment were not significant.
Fig. 1 illustrates the relationship between treatment nitrogen levels and disease rating, photosynthesis rate, and percent foliar nitrogen of three strawberry clones following inoculation with Colletotrichum fragariae.
The first table describes the results of regression analysis between eight treatment nitrogen levels, categorized by either low or high phosphorus and potassium levels, and their impact on percent foliar nitrogen, disease ratings, and photosynthesis rates of greenhouse-grown strawberry plants following inoculation. Notably, nitrogen and potassium levels of 0 were excluded from the analysis.
The second table outlines the effects of nitrogen levels applied with either low or high phosphorus and potassium levels on anthracnose crown rot disease ratings and percent foliar nitrogen in strawberry plants grown in sand culture in the greenhouse. Means are calculated from five plants each of the three strawberry clones (MSUS 37, MSUS 70, and MSUS 98). Each treatment solution also contained various essential nutrients, and the pH was adjusted to 6.5. Disease severity was rated on a scale from 0 (no symptoms) to 6 (plant dead) after 30 days of inoculation. Foliar nitrogen was determined by micro-Kjeldahl analysis, and mean separation within columns was performed by Least Significant Difference at P = 0.05. The phosphorus and potassium levels were specified for both low and high treatments.
Foliar nitrogen level. Foliar nitrogen increased with treatment nitrogen levels, but there was no significant effect on foliar nitrogen levels due to phosphorus and potassium levels. A significant difference in foliar nitrogen level was observed among the strawberry clones: the average foliar nitrogen content of ‘MSUS 98’ plants was significantly higher than that of ‘MSUS 70’ and ‘MSUS 37’ plants. When averaged across the three strawberry clones, the highest levels of foliar nitrogen were obtained from plants treated with 320, 160, or 80 ppm nitrogen, while the lowest levels were from plants receiving 0, 5, or 10 ppm nitrogen.
Nitrogen levels of 2.0 to 3.0% are generally considered adequate for normal growth and development of strawberry plants, while plants with N levels below 2.0% are considered deficient. In these studies, plants whose leaves contained less than 1.7% foliar N at inoculation had lower disease ratings than plants with greater levels of foliar N. Disease ratings of all three clones were in the susceptible range when sufficient N was applied to achieve adequate (i.e., greater than 2%) levels of foliar N. ‘MSUS 37’ plants received a disease severity rating greater than 4.0 (in the susceptible range) at the treatment N level of 60 ppm and foliar N content of 1.5%. ‘MSUS 70’ plants received a disease severity rating greater than 4.0 at the treatment N level of 100 ppm and foliar N content of 1.8%, and ‘MSUS 98’ plants received a disease severity rating greater than 4.0 at the treatment N level of 120 ppm and foliar N content of 2.0%.
The average disease severity ratings (DR) at each foliar N level followed the application of nutrient solutions containing various levels of N to strawberry plants grown in sand culture in the greenhouse. The disease severity rating was averaged across 16 nutrient treatments and three strawberry clones (MSUS 37, MSUS 70, and MSUS 98) whose % foliar N fell into each group. Each treatment solution also contained calcium, magnesium, iron, sulfur, manganese, zinc, copper, boron, cobalt, and molybdenum, with the pH adjusted to 6.5. Foliar N was determined by micro-Kjeldahl, and the disease severity was rated on a scale of 0 (no symptoms) to 6 (plant dead) 30 days after inoculation with Colletotrichum fragariae isolate CF-63. Mean separation was performed by Least Significant Difference, P = 0.05.
The photosynthesis rate was similar in plants of all three clones and increased as treatment N levels increased. It was lowest on plants treated with the lower N concentrations (0 ppm N = 0.28 mg CO2/m/sec to 80 ppm N = 0.35 mg CO2/m/sec), increased on plants treated with 160 ppm N (0.47 mg CO2/m/sec), and nearly doubled on plants treated with 320 ppm N (0.87 mg CO2/m/sec). There was no significant effect on the photosynthesis rate due to P and K levels or a significant interaction between N level and strawberry clone.
Two studies compared the effect of seven N sources, each applied at three levels, on anthracnose crown rot severity. In Nitrogen Source Study I, significant differences were observed due to strawberry clone, N source, and N level, as well as a significant interaction between N source and N level. ‘MSUS 98’ plants had lower disease severity ratings than ‘MSUS 37’ or ‘MSUS 70’ plants when averaged across all treatments. Plants receiving 160 ppm N had higher disease severity ratings than plants receiving 0 ppm N or 40 ppm N. The highest disease severity ratings were from plants receiving 160 ppm of (NH4)2HPO4, (NH4)2SO4, and NH4Cl. Plants receiving 160 ppm Ca(
The analysis of variance results from two studies compared the effect of seven nitrogen treatments applied at three levels to greenhouse-grown strawberry plants on anthracnose crown rot disease severity ratings. Eight weeks after the initiation of treatment applications, plants were inoculated with a suspension of Colletotrichum fragariae conidia, incubated in a dew chamber at 30°C and 100% relative humidity for 48 hours, and then held in the greenhouse at 22 ± 7°C. The results of Nitrogen Source Study II were similar to those of Nitrogen Source Study I. Plants of ‘Tangi’ and ‘MSUS 74’ exhibited higher disease severity ratings than plants of ‘MSUS 70’ and ‘MSUS 98’. Plants receiving no nitrogen had lower disease severity ratings than those receiving 40 ppm nitrogen or 120 ppm nitrogen. The lowest disease ratings due to nitrogen source were observed in plants receiving the calcium nitrate, potassium nitrate, and ammonium nitrate treatments.
In the analysis, the study sources were examined for different factors, including nitrogen source and level. The first nitrogen source study indicated significant differences in the disease ratings based on clone type and treatment levels, with a highly significant interaction between source and level. In the second nitrogen source study, similar results were observed, with significant effects attributed to both the nitrogen source and level of application.
The main treatment effects from the studies revealed varying disease severity ratings (DR) based on nitrogen sources and levels. In Nitrogen Source Study I, the ammonium sulfate treatment resulted in an average DR of 4.3 at 160 ppm, while in Study II, it had a DR of 4.8 at 120 ppm. The table detailing these findings highlighted the differences in ratings among various nitrogen sources and their levels, emphasizing the significance of nitrogen management for controlling anthracnose crown rot in strawberry plants.
The implications of these studies indicate that the source and level of nitrogen in fertilizers significantly impact the severity of anthracnose crown rot in strawberries, while the levels of phosphorus and potassium did not show a notable effect. Notably, plants that received nitrogen as calcium nitrate exhibited less severe anthracnose symptoms compared to those receiving nitrogen in ammonium form. Despite the trials being conducted with greenhouse-grown potted plants, the results are applicable to strawberries cultivated in sandy soils, which are typical in Florida.
These results suggest that strawberry growers can modify their fertilizer regimes by using Ca(NO3)2 as their nitrogen source to reduce anthracnose crown rot severity while maintaining the higher foliar nitrogen levels needed for good growth and production. As expected, foliar nitrogen increased in this study as treatment nitrogen levels increased, and there was no effect on foliar nitrogen levels due to phosphorus and potassium levels. In a similar study, the severity of anthracnose fruit rot (caused by C. acutatum) was reduced when Ca(NO3)2 was applied to greenhouse-grown strawberries. Similar results were also reported for the control of Fusarium diseases in tomato and chrysanthemum. There was a significant difference in foliar nitrogen levels among the strawberry clones, suggesting that nitrogen applications should be tailored to each cultivar; however, the trend of reduced anthracnose severity with nitrate fertilizer was similar across the five strawberry clones in these trials, indicating that other cultivars would respond in the same way.
Acknowledgment: I thank Wanda S. Elliott for technical assistance.
Literature Cited:
The data on nitrogen sources shows different treatment nitrogen levels and their respective effects on strawberry growth. The treatments included various nitrogen compounds with two nitrogen levels (40 ppm and 160 ppm) and their corresponding results for disease resistance (DRx) and foliar nitrogen (FNy). For example, (NH4)2SO4 showed a DRx of 2.7 at 40 ppm and 5.9 at 160 ppm, while Ca(NO3)2 had consistent results of 2.9 for both levels. Notably, foliar nitrogen levels varied significantly across the treatments, with Ca(NO3)2 yielding the highest foliar nitrogen at 2.30, while the no nitrogen treatment recorded the lowest at 1.01.
Louisiana and Mississippi. Crop Protection 26:1449-1458. Woltz, S. S., and Engelhard, A. W. 1973. Fusarium wilt of chrysanthemum: effect of nitrogen source and lime on disease development. Phytopathology 63:155-157. Woltz, S. S., and Jones, J. P. 1973. Tomato Fusarium wilt control by adjustments in soil fertility. Proceedings of the Florida State Horticultural Society 86:157-159. 9 June 2009 Plant Health Progress.
