Effect of Phosphite on Tomato and Pepper Plants and on Susceptibility of Pepper to Phytophthora Root and Crown Rot in Hydroponic Culture
H. Förster, J. E. Adaskaveg, D. H. Kim, and M. E. Stanghellini, Department of Plant Pathology, University of California, Riverside 92521
Phosphorus nutrition for plants is provided in various forms of phosphates, which are salts of phosphoric acid. Although phosphates occur naturally in soil, their poor availability necessitates soil amendment with commercial fertilizers to supply phosphorus nutrition. Phosphonates are reduced phosphorus compounds with selective effectiveness against oomycetous fungi. The question has been raised whether phosphonates can replace phosphates as a source of phosphorus while additionally providing disease control. Currently, several commercial products contain phosphonate (e.g., phosphite, the salt of phosphorous acid) as the phosphorus carrier. These products are registered as supplemental soil and foliar fertilizers for both annual and perennial crops. The goal of our study was to investigate and quantify plant growth responses following root application of selected phosphorus formulations and to determine their effects on plant susceptibility to Phytophthora root rot. Specifically, we wanted to ascertain if phosphorous acid or its salt, phosphite, can substitute for phosphate fertilization and support healthy plant development of tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum L.) and green pepper (Capsicum annuum L.). Additionally, pepper plants grown with different phosphorus fertilizers were evaluated for disease incidence and severity of Phytophthora root and crown rot caused by Phytophthora capsici. A nutrient-film hydroponic culture system was chosen for our investigations. Hydroponic culture provides plant roots with nutrients from defined solutions, which typically contain less diverse and probably smaller populations of microorganisms than soil systems. This may reduce the potential microbial oxidation of phosphorous acid to phosphoric acid. Furthermore, hydroponic systems have proven to be very useful in short-term studies for managing Phytophthora capsici on pepper.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Hydroponic growing system for tomato and green pepper plants. Tomato (cv. Bonny Best Improved, Seminis Seed Company, Woodland, CA) and green pepper (cv. Joe Parker) plants were grown from seed in a root cube growth medium. Seeds were sown in 75 mm long plastic cylindrical culture tubes (18 mm inner diameter) filled with a growth medium and immersed in water. The recirculating nutrient-film hydroponic system was set up in a greenhouse on the University of California-Riverside campus. The system was established on eight greenhouse benches. Six 3-m-long PVC pipes, 10 cm in diameter, were placed on each bench, with seven evenly spaced sets of three holes made in each pipe for inserting plant culture tubes. Uniform-sized seedlings were selected and transferred into the hydroponic system after 10 to 14 days (designated as day 1 of the hydroponic experiment). After one week, two plants per set of three were removed to ensure uniformity. Nutrient solutions were pumped from a 40-liter reservoir for each bench through drip irrigation hoses connected to one end of each PVC tube using 3.8 liter/h emitters. Solutions were collected on the opposite end through drain holes and returned to the reservoir via drip irrigation hoses. Each bench corresponded to one treatment. Air temperature, relative humidity, leaf wetness, water temperature, and water electrical conductivity for each treatment were monitored every minute using electronic sensors and data loggers.
Scientific research was conducted in Logan, UT, where data were summarized daily for average, maximum, and minimum values from each sensor. A basic nutrient solution was prepared using distilled water combined with the following compounds: 1.5 mM Ca(NO3)2, 2 mM CaSO4, 1.5 mM MgSO4, 43 µM EDTA-Fe, and 0.1 ml of a trace element solution (which included 0.208 µg of BO3H3, 0.028 µg of CuSO4·5H2O, 0.560 µg of EDTA-Fe, 0.598 µg of MnSO4·H2O, 0.025 µg of Mo7O24(NH4)6·4H2O, and 0.337 µg of ZnSO4·7H2O per ml) for each liter. The seven nutrient solutions, each containing a final potassium content of 3 mM, were as follows:
(i) 1.5 mM K2SO4 for the no phosphorus solution; (ii) 1.45 mM K2SO4 and 0.1 mM KH2PO4 for the 0.1 mM phosphate solution; (iii) 1 mM K2SO4 and 1 mM KH2PO4 for the 1 mM phosphate solution; (iv) 1.43 mM K2SO4 combined with 38.7 µl of technical phosphite stock solution per liter (prepared with 212 g of phosphorous acid per liter buffered to pH 6.4 with KOH) for the 0.1 mM phosphite solution; (v) 0.84 mM K2SO4 and 386 µl of technical phosphite stock solution per liter for the 1 mM phosphite solution; (vi) 0.80 mM K2SO4, 1 mM KH2PO4, and 116 µl of technical phosphite stock solution per liter for the 1 mM phosphate/0.3 mM phosphite solution; (vii) 1 mM K2SO4 and 1 mM phosphite (supplied as Nutri-Phite P Foliar, 4-30-8, from Biagro Western Sales, Inc., Visalia, CA) for the commercial phosphite treatment.
In the study, tomato and pepper plants were grown hydroponically in a greenhouse using phosphate or technical and commercial formulations of phosphite as sources of phosphorus nutrition to evaluate their effects on plant development and susceptibility to Phytophthora root and crown rot. Phosphite-treated tomato and pepper plants showed phosphate deficiency, displaying symptoms of phosphorus deficiency. The growth of plants (including leaf area, as well as leaf, stem, and root dry weights) fertilized with phosphite was significantly (P < 0.05) lower compared to those fertilized with phosphate. In Phytophthora capsici-inoculated pepper plants, the incidence of Phytophthora crown rot was significantly reduced in phosphite-treated plants compared to those receiving no phosphorus or phosphate treatment. The crown rot incidence in pepper plants treated with 1 mM phosphate plus 0.3 mM phosphite fell between those treated solely with phosphite (either 1 mM or 0.1 mM) and those treated with phosphate (1 mM). Additional keywords include phosphonate fungicides and phosphorous acid.
The pH of each nutrient solution was adjusted to 5.5 using 3 N HCl. The nutrient solutions were changed twice during the tomato experiments
Inoculation of pepper plants with P. capsici. Two procedures were used for inoculation. In the first experiment, 5 ml of a zoospore suspension (5,000 zoospores per ml) of P. capsici (isolate 6143 from green pepper plants) was added on day 16 to each seedling in the hydroponic system. In the second experiment, a severely infected plant from the first experiment was left in the hydroponic system to serve as an inoculum source. The 0.1 mM phosphate treatment was not inoculated and served as the control. Eight plants in a single replication were used for each treatment and for each experiment.
Harvest and measurements. Tomato plants (6 plants per treatment) or pepper plants (8 plants per treatment) were harvested 23 days after transferring them into the hydroponic system. For the determination of leaf areas, photographs of all leaves of four individual plants were taken, scanned into the computer using the program PHOTOSHOP version 4.0 (Adobe Systems, Inc.), and the total leaf area per plant was calculated using the computer program Image-Pro Plus version 1.3 (Media Cybernetics, Silver Spring, MD). Dry weights for stems, leaves, and roots of tomato plants or shoots and roots of pepper plants were obtained after drying tissues for 2 days at 65°C. Experiments using tomato plants were repeated three times in spring and summer using single replications of six plants per treatment. Experiments using single replications of eight pepper plants per treatment were done twice in the summer.
Disease evaluation. Disease incidence of P. capsici–inoculated green pepper plants was visually determined at the time when all inoculated control plants exhibited Phytophthora crown rot. This occurred approximately 2 weeks after inoculation in the first experiment and 4 weeks after inoculation in the second experiment. Tissue samples from roots or lower stems were used for reisolation of P. capsici on a modified Kannwischer and Mitchell medium (cornmeal agar containing 5 µg of pimaricin, 50 µg of rifampicin, 100 µg of ampicillin, 100 µg of PCNB, and 50 µg of hymexazol per ml).
Phosphate analysis. For both tomato and pepper, samples were ground with a mortar and pestle and passed through a 0.417-mm sieve. Phosphate analysis of the nutrient solutions was also done before and after each nutrient solution change for the tomato experiments. Phosphate analyses were conducted by the DANR Analytical Laboratory (University of California, Davis).
Statistical analysis. For tomato growth parameters, three experiments were conducted, and the means of six plants per treatment per experiment were treated as replications in the statistical analysis. For leaf areas, data were available for only two experiments. For statistical analysis of phosphate concentrations of tomato plants, the dried leaf samples of the six plants u
Statistical analysis of phosphate levels before and after changing each nutrient solution was based on four samples, two each from two experiments. Data were analyzed using analysis of variance procedures, and multiple comparisons of means were performed using least significant difference (LSD) procedures.
RESULTS
Growth responses of tomato plants grown with different phosphorus fertilizers. All plants in treatments with phosphite alone (technical or commercial grades of phosphite) exhibited foliar symptoms typical of phosphorus deficiency that were identical to symptoms of plants grown without phosphorus in the control treatment. Foliar symptoms included darker green leaves and the accumulation of reddish to purplish (anthocyanin) pigments on the lower leaf surface. Plant growth using phosphate as the only phosphorus source was significantly increased compared with the no-phosphorus control or plants supplied with phosphite alone. There was a significant difference in stem dry weights between the two phosphate levels (0.1 mM or 1 mM), and a trend toward higher leaf and root dry weights as well as leaf area was observed for the 0.1 mM phosphate treatment.
The combined 1 mM phosphate/0.3 mM phosphorous acid treatment increased tomato leaf area significantly compared with all other treatments, and a trend was observed for higher leaf dry weight. For all phosphate treatments, values for leaf areas and dry weights of leaves, roots, and stems were approximately two- to fivefold higher compared with the phosphite and no-phosphorus control treatments. Plants that were fertilized with phosphite (0.1 or 1 mM) had leaf areas and dry weights of leaf, stem, and root tissue similar to the no-phosphorus control. The root
ratio (based on dry weights), with an average value of 0.25, was highest for the no-phosphorus treatment compared with the other treatments. The various phosphorus fertilizers (phosphate or phosphite) decreased relative root
growth between 57.5% and 45.5% compared with the no-phosphorus treatment. Average and maximum/minimum environmental parameters for the three experiments were: 22.3°C, 27.9/17.9°C air temperature; 76.5%, 86.7/60% relative humidity; 23.5°C, 28.3/20.1°C water temperature; and 1.41 mS/cm, 1.9/1.1 mS/cm temperature-corrected electrical conductivity.
Growth responses of pepper plants grown with different phosphorus fertilizers. Growth responses of pepper were similar to those of tomato plants, and differences were observed between the phosphate and phosphite or no-phosphorus treatments. Shoot dry weights averaged 4,626.3 ± 2,124.9 mg, 332.4 ± 205.9 mg, and 190.7 ± 91.5 mg per plant for phosphate- and phosphate/phosphite-treated plants, phosphite-treated, and no phosphorus-treated plants, respectively. Root dry weights averaged 860.8 ± 608.9 mg, 75.2 ± 93.0 mg, and 69.9 ± 51.9 mg per plant for phosphate- and phosphate/phosphite-treated plants, phosphite-treated, and no phosphorus-treated plants, respectively. No difference was observed in shoot or root dry weights for plants treated with the commercial form of phosphite compared with plants treated without phosphorus.
Average and maximum/minimum environmental parameters for both pepper experiments were: 23.3°C, 28.6/19.5°C air temperature; 75.5%, 85.5/58.4% relative humidity; 25.1°C, 28.2/22.6°C water temperature; and 1.51 mS/cm, 1.76/1.47 mS/cm temperature-corrected electrical conductivity.
Disease evaluation of P. capsici-inoculated pepper plants showed that disease symptoms caused by P. capsici included discolored roots and girdling dark lesions on the hypocotyls (crown rot), which generally resulted in plant death. Crown rot incidence was significantly lower (P < 0.05) in plants supplied with either phosphite formulation as a phosphorus source compared to the no phosphorus or phosphate-treated plants. Plants fertilized with a combination of phosphate (1 mM) and phosphite (0.3 mM) exhibited an intermediate response between the high susceptibility of phosphate- and no phosphorus-treated plants and the low disease incidence observed among plants treated with any formulation of phosphite. Between 2 and 4 weeks after inoculation in both experiments, plants treated with no phosphorus died, and disease incidence generally increased in both phosphate- and phosphite-treated plants. However, most plants treated with the commercial form of phosphorous acid still appeared healthy after 4 weeks. Root/lower stem isolations consistently recovered P. capsici from all treatments except the non-inoculated 0.1 mM phosphate-treated plants.
Regarding phosphate concentrations in nutrient solutions, there was no difference in phosphate concentration between the no phosphorus and phosphite treatments. Phosphate concentrations in the 1 mM phosphate or 1 mM phosphate/0.3 mM phosphite treatments were highest, approximately 10-fold higher than the 0.1 mM phosphate solution. No significant change (P > 0.05) in phosphate concentration was observed in solutions that had circulated for 6 to 8 days in the hydroponic system compared to freshly prepared solutions.
In terms of phosphate concentrations in tomato and green pepper plants, the concentrations in tomat
Plant Disease / October 1998
The commercial formulation of phosphite resulted in significantly higher levels compared to both the no phosphorus-treated and the 0.1 mM phosphite-treated plants. The root tissue available for phosphite-treated and no-phosphorus-treated plants was generally insufficient for phosphate analysis, thus root analyses were not conducted. Similar results for phosphate concentrations were observed in the pepper plants.
DISCUSSION
One of the objectives of this research was to evaluate the effect of phosphorous acid formulations on plant development compared with phosphate treatments. Our results demonstrated that phosphite-treated tomato and pepper plants were deficient in phosphate and developed phosphorus-deficiency symptoms when grown hydroponically from seedlings to early development (approximately three weeks). Growth of plants fertilized with phosphorous acid or its commercial form (Nutri Phite) was significantly reduced compared to plants supplemented with phosphate. This finding aligns with previous research using potted plants. Severe phosphorus starvation was also evident in the no-phosphorus control plants. In our study, growth parameters of plants growing in 0.1 mM phosphate were either higher or not significantly different from those growing in 1 mM phosphate. Wilcox indicated that phosphorus levels in whole plant tops were 3,500 µg/g for adequate nutrient concentration and 2,800 µg/g in deficient tomato seedlings 24 to 31 days after emergence. Our study showed that the 1.0 mM phosphate treatment had a concentration exceeding 7,000 µg/g. Although nutrient toxicity from phosphorus and other macronutrients is rare, it has been suggested that excessive uptake can lead to imbalances with other nutrients, resulting in poor plant growth. Therefore, the high levels of phosphate in plants grown with the 1.0 mM phosphate treatment may explain the significantly reduced stem dry weights and leaf area, as well as lower leaf and root dry weights compared to plants grown with the 0.1 mM phosphate treatment.
Evaluating the combined effects of phosphate and phosphite nutrition, Carswell et al. found that adding phosphite (1.5 to 10 mM) to phosphate-limited Brassica nigra seedlings reduced plant growth, while only the 10 mM phosphite levels caused a reduction in phosphate-sufficient plants. Additionally, while root-to-shoot ratios of phosphate-stressed plants were typically high, phosphite supplementation decreased the root-to-shoot ratio to about 40% of control values. These effects were explained by Carswell et al. as a disruption of the phosphate-starvation response by phosphonates, causing phosphate-limited plants to behave as though they were phosphorus-sufficient. In our study, root-to-shoot ratios of tomato plants were also much lower for the phosphorous acid-fertilized plants compared to the no-phosphorus plants, indicating similar effects on phosphate metabolism. However, a combined 1 mM phosphate/0.3 mM phosphorous acid treatment significantly increased leaf area in two experiments where this parameter was measured, and a trend for greater leaf dry weight was observed in three experiments compared to phosphate treatment alone. This finding might explain the registered label of commercial formulations of phosphite as supplemental fertilizers for improved plant growth and increased crop yield. Additional studies are needed to evaluate potential interactions between phosphite and phosphate fertilizers. Phosphorous acid is readily taken up by plants and is both xylem- and phloem-mobile. Using ion chromatography for phosphorous acid quantification, previous studies demonstrated that phosphonates appear to be stable in avocado plants, persisting in this form for several months.
Boyer reported a biological inertness of organic and inorganic phosphites. In our experiments, phosphate concentrations of tomato plants treated with technical phosphite did not differ statistically from those of the no-phosphorus control plants. Phosphate levels in the solutions were not significantly different (P > 0.05) when freshly made or after one week in the recirculating hydroponic system, supporting previous work that, in aqueous solutions, molecular oxygen does not readily oxidize phosphonates. A general trend for higher phosphate levels was observed in the 1.0 mM phosphite solutions compared with the no-phosphorus treatment. For fresh or old solutions, measurable levels of phosphate in the no-phosphorus and the 1 mM phosphite treatments ranged from 0.2 to 0.6 µg/ml, respectively. Contamination could have occurred from the salts used for the basic nutrient solution. In plants treated with a commercial formulation of phosphite, phosphate concentrations were significantly above those of the no-phosphorus treated plants. This increase could be explained by the slightly increased phosphate levels in the nutrient solution. Decreased phosphate concentrations in plant tissue of the 1 mM phosphate/0.3 mM phosphite treated plants relative to the 1 mM phosphate treated plants is in agreement with previous studies that showed that the growth of phosphate-sufficient plants in the presence of phosphite caused a reduction in root and leaf phosphate levels. The effect of phosphorus compounds on disease control was studied using P. capsici–inoculated pepper plants. Plants grown with both formulations of phosphorous acid had significantly less Phytophthora crown rot compared with the no-phosphorus or phosphate-treated plants. This observation supports a number of studies dealing with phosphonates as antifungal compounds against oomycetous fungi. Although P. capsici was isolated from plants treated with the commercial formulation of phosphite, disease symptoms were not observed in most of the plants over the experimental period of four weeks. Therefore, the commercial form of phosphorous acid had additional benefits in reducing Phytophthora root rot compared with technical phosphorous acid. The reason for this is unknown; however, undeclared ingredients in the commercial formulation may be responsible. This is the first report that demonstrated that technical and commercial formulations of phosphite significantly reduced the incidence of Phytophthora root and crown rot of pepper but did not provide sufficient phosphorus nutrition to tomato and pepper plants when used as sole sources of phosphorus in a recirculating hydroponic system.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank K. Conn for supplying tomato seeds, N. Goldberg for supplying pepper seeds, C. Lid dell for providing an isolate of P. capsici, and C. Huang for her excellent technical assistance.
LITERATURE CITED
