Effects of Temperature on Sporulation and Latent Period of Colletotrichum Spp. Infecting Strawberry Fruit
Anthracnose of strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa Duchesne) has become a major constraint on strawberry production in the United States. All parts of the strawberry plant can become infected, leading to substantial yield losses. The disease is primarily caused by Colletotrichum acutatum J. H. Simmonds, C. gloeosporioides (Penz.) Penz. & Sacc. in Penz., and C. fragariae Brooks, although Gloeosporium spp., Glomerella cingulata (the teleomorph of C. gloeosporioides), and C. dematium have also been shown to cause infections. There has been considerable controversy regarding the taxonomy of this genus, but recent isozyme and molecular evidence confirm the uniqueness of the three primary species. In recent years, C. acutatum has become the dominant species infecting strawberry fruit in many parts of the United States. Often, C. gloeosporioides and C. fragariae are associated with the infection of parts of the plant other than fruit, but both are capable of infecting and rotting fruit.
The extensive use of fungicides is often required to manage this disease, highlighting the need for methods to reduce the number of spray applications or improve the timing of fungicides. Disease forecasting, based on environmental conditions, may help enhance spray timing and achieve a more sustainable production system. The epidemiology of C. acutatum in Ohio has been extensively studied, with research focusing on the effects of environmental conditions on infection, spore germination, splash dispersal, and disease spread. Madden et al. investigated the impact of ground cover and ambient weather conditions on the spread of anthracnose in Ohio. They assessed disease incidence in strawberry plots with different ground covers (plastic, straw, or bare soil) and identified the weather variables most correlated with disease incidence through stepwise regression analysis. The best regression model for disease incidence was based on rainfall, days since inoculum introduction, an index of infection based on wetness duration and temperature, and distance from the spore source. However, only half of the variation in disease incidence was explained by the model, suggesting that inoculum production and other factors contribute to the unexplained variability.
While several studies have indicated the potential importance of sporulation in the epidemiology of C. acutatum, no reports have quantified the sporulation of this pathogen. Additionally, there is very little epidemiological research on C. fragariae and C. gloeosporioides affecting strawberries. The long-term goal of this work is to understand why C. acutatum has recently become the dominant fruit-rotting pathogen and to provide information that could eventually aid in the timing of fungicide applications. The specific objectives of this study were to (i) determine the latent periods and sporulation of Colletotrichum spp. infecting strawberry fruit in relation to temperature and incubation time, (ii) compare the sporulation and latent period of selected isolates of the three Colletotrichum spp., and (iii) quantify sporulation and latent period concerning temperature and incubation time using regression analysis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Inoculum production involved obtaining isolates of C. acutatum, C. fragariae, and C. gloeosporioides from infected strawberry fruit from different regions.
All cultures were maintained on potato dextrose agar (PDA) in 100 × 15 mm petri dishes. Conidia from 2-week-old cultures were streaked onto new PDA plates every week using a sterilized probe. To maintain the pathogenicity of the isolates, conidia from previously inoculated fruit were streaked onto new PDA plates every 2 weeks. Cultures were maintained at 26°C with 12 hours of light (51 µE s–1 m–2) per day. Inoculum for fruit inoculations was prepared by scraping plates and suspending conidia in 20 ml of deionized water. The spore suspensions were vortexed for 1.5 minutes, then adjusted to 2.5 × 10^4 conidia/ml using a hemacytometer. Based on the results of preliminary experiments, this was the lowest spore density that resulted in 100% fruit infection.
Strawberry plants (cv. Midway), obtained as transplants from a nursery, were grown in 15-cm-diameter pots containing a mixture of sand, peat, and disinfected loam (1:2:2, vol/vol/vol). New plants were planted weekly. Plants were maintained in a greenhouse at the Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center (OARDC), Wooster, OH. Temperature in the greenhouse ranged from 16 to 26°C. Natural sunlight was supplemented with artificial lights for 16 hours daily. Plants were watered with deionized water each day and were fertilized biweekly with a balanced fertilizer.
The effects of temperature on sporulation and the latent period of Colletotrichum spp. infecting strawberry fruit were determined in controlled-environment studies. Detached immature fruit were inoculated with a conidial suspension and incubated for up to 36 days at constant temperatures of 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, and 35°C. The latent period (time to first sporulation) depended on temperature and ranged from 2 to 3 days at 25°C to 6 to 17 days at 5°C. C. acutatum had a shorter latent period than the other species at 5 and 10°C; at higher temperatures, the latent periods of the species were very similar. During the first 4 days of sporulation, there was an optimum-type relationship between the logarithm of conidia per fruit and temperature, with maximum observed sporulation (generally 10^6 to 10^7 conidia per fruit) occurring from 15 to 30°C. Sporulation increased over time at temperatures of 15°C and above. The greatest difference among the species was observed at 5 and 10°C, where tested C. acutatum isolates produced 10 to 100 times more conidia per fruit than the other species. Polynomial regression equations were successfully used to represent the logarithm of conidia as a function of temperature and incubation time. The rate of increase in sporulation over time was a function of temperature, with a predicted optimum of 22 to 26°C. Equations were validated by predicting sporulation of the three species infecting fruit attached to plants growing in controlled-environment chambers. Although the predictions tended to be slightly large
Sporulation in detached fruit. General methods were similar to those in Madden et al. and Yang et al. Fruit, with pedicels intact, were detached from strawberry plants when at the white stage, which is when chlorophyll breakdown occurs. The fruit were rinsed in 70% ethanol for 2 minutes and then placed in plastic tubs (24 × 24 × 10 cm) containing steel mesh. The pedicel of each fruit was placed through the mesh and submerged in water to reduce fruit desiccation. Fruit were inoculated by spraying them with an atomizer until runoff. Lids were placed on the tubs to maintain free moisture on the fruit surface and relative humidity (RH) above 80%. RH was measured in a separate tub without fruit by placing wet-bulb and dry-bulb thermistors immediately over the mesh. RH and temperature were recorded with a Campbell CR-21 Micrologger. Tubs were placed in an incubator set at 26°C for 24 hours. Lids of the tubs were then removed and the tubs were placed in an incubator set at one of the following temperatures: 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, or 35°C. Temperature was recorded every 10 minutes to ensure consistent conditions. Duration of incubation ranged from 2 to 36 days, depending on the temperature. The sporulation of C. acutatum OH, C. acutatum MS, C. fragariae MS, and C. gloeosporioides FL was evaluated for all seven temperatures. Sporulation of the other isolates was evaluated only at 15, 20, 25, and 30°C. The latent period was assessed as the time from inoculation until lesions appeared on any of the fruit. During preliminary studies, it was found that lesion appearance coincided with the time of first sporulation. For sporulation assessment, five fruit were randomly taken from the tubs at the temperature-dependent sampling times. Fruit weight was determined and the percent area of lesions covering the fruit was estimated visually for each fruit for C. acutatum OH and MS, C. fragariae MS, and C. gloeosporioides FL. Each individual fruit was placed in 50 ml of deionized water and agitated for 1.5 minutes. The fruit was removed, and the spore suspension was vortexed for 1.5 minutes. Four 10-µl samples were placed on a hemacytometer, and the density of conidia per milliliter was calculated. The mean of the samples was used to represent each fruit. Each test was done at least three times. Each species, isolate, and temperature combination was tested in random order.
Effects of free surface moisture on sporulation. A limited set of temperature/incubation time combinations were tested with the OH and MS isolates of C. acutatum, C. fragariae MS, and C. gloeosporioides FL, to determine if free moisture on strawberry fruit affected sporulation. Procedures were the same as in the previously described experiment, except that the lids remained on the tubs during the entire incubation period. Fruit were also lightly misted daily with an atomizer, but no runoff was visible. The experiment was conducted at three temperatures: 20, 25, and 30°C. Sporulation at selected incubation times was assessed as described above and compared with sporulation at the same times for infected fruit without free moisture. The differences in sporulation were divided by log(conidia) for the tests without free moisture, and then multiplied by 100 to achieve a percentage scale.
Sporulation on attached fruit. Sporulation on infected fruit attached to plants was assessed for C. acutatum OH and MS, C. fragariae MS, and C. gloeosporioides FL in order to validate results from detached fruit studies. Strawberry plants were grown in the greenhouse as described above. Plants were chosen when the fruit were at the white stage. Inoculation procedures were similar to those of Wilson et al. and as previously described here, except that the pedicels of the fruit were held as fruit were s
Immediately after inoculation, plants were placed in a controlled environmental chamber and misted for 24 hours with a mister; the plants were then moved to another chamber, which was set at one of the following temperatures: 15, 20, 25, or 30°C. Lights were turned on (190 µE s–1 m–2) for 14 hours daily. Relative humidity averaged 40 to 60% in the chamber. Five fruits were sampled starting when lesions appeared, and sporulation was assessed as described above. Sporulation assessment continued from 2 to 28 days, depending on the temperature. Not all four temperatures were evaluated for all isolates due to limitations in plant production in the greenhouse, and the number of incubation times varied. Each test was conducted one to three times.
Data analysis: The effects of temperature (T) and incubation time from the start of sporulation (I) on conidia produced per fruit (Y) were quantified by regression analysis. Regression models were developed assuming the following: (i) an optimal-type relationship between Y and T, where Y increased to a maximum and then decreased; and (ii) a monotonic (increasing or decreasing) relationship between Y and I, where the minimum value for Y was zero. Logarithmic polynomial models were fitted to the sporulation data. An overall regression model for each isolate was based on separate regression analysis for each temperature. At each temperature, log(Y) was regressed on I or log(I + 1) to determine the most appropriate simple equation for sporulation over time. The logarithmic function of Y was chosen to stabilize variances in sporulation. Additionally, to help determine the most appropriate relationship between Y and T, log(Y) for the first 4 days of sporulation (referred to as “initial sporulation”) was regressed on polynomials of temperature (without a term for time). Each tested equation used two of the following terms: T, T², T³, and T⁴. Separate regression equations were calculated for each species and isolate. An overall polynomial model for sporulation, based on the above results, was developed with the general form log(Y) = f(I,T), where f(I,T) represents a linear function of some of the following terms: I, log(I + 1), log(I + 1)T, log(I + 1)T², log(I + 1)T³, and log(I + 1)T⁴. Randomness and normality of residuals were evaluated as described in the data.
The sources and designation of Colletotrichum spp. used in this study include various species and isolates obtained from strawberry, along with their respective sources and states of origin. The significance of the model coefficients was determined by t-tests. Coefficients of determination (R²) and R² adjusted for degrees of freedom (Ra²) were calculated to measure the proportion of variation explained by the models. Regression analysis was performed for each repetition of the experiments separately and for the pooled data for each species and isolate.
The square root of the mean square error (the standard error about the line for the best-fitting regression equation) was used to calculate a standard error of the difference (SED) and least significant difference (LSD) between means. The latent period (L) was modeled with the equation log(L) = b0 + b1T + b2T². As with the equation for sporulation, this equation was fitted to the data for each species and isolate. Evaluation of the model results was the same as for the sporulation equation. Fruit weight (W) and estimated percent area of fruit covered with lesions (A) were correlated with log(Y) for the OH and MS isolates of C. acutatum, the MS isolate of C. fragariae, and the FL isolate of C. gloeosporioides. Separate correlation coefficients were calculated for each isolate. The best-fitting model for sporulation of detached fruit was used to predict sporulation on attached fruit in controlled-environment chambers. T and I were based on conditions with attached fruit (in the controlled-environment chamber), but model parameters were obtained from the detached-fruit studies. A prediction interval was determined for each T and I combination using methods from statistical analysis.
RESULTS
Effects of temperature and incubation time on sporulation. An optimum-type relationship was found between temperature and sporulation. During the first 4 days after sporulation began, conidia production of all isolates was lowest at 5 and 10°C and increased until an optimum temperature of 15 to 25°C was reached. Sporulation generally decreased at or above 30°C. Colletotrichum acutatum CA, CT, and OH produced about 10⁷ conidia per fruit at 25°C. The two C. acutatum isolates also produced substantially more spores at low temperatures (5 and 10°C) than the tested isolates of the other two species. For instance, C. acutatum OH and MS produced 4.0 × 10⁵ conidia per fruit, while C. gloeosporioides FL and C. fragariae MS produced about 10³ and 10⁴ conidia per fruit at 5°C, respectively. From 15 to 30°C, the C. acutatum isolates generally had similar sporulation. The major difference was C. acutatum CA at 15°C, where fewer than 10⁶ conidia per fruit were produced, on average. The two C. fragariae isolates sporulated similarly over 15 to 30°C. However, the C. gloeosporioides isolates had a large difference at 30°C, where the NC isolate produced more than 10 times the number of conidia per fruit compared to the FL isolate. Sporulation of C. acutatum OH and MS, C. fragariae MS, and C. gloeosporioides FL was virtually constant over time at both 5 and 10°C. As temperatures increased (≥15°C), sporulation increased over time for the isolates tested. The C. acutatum isolates produced more spores at low temperatures over time than isolates of the other two species. After sporulation began, maximum sporulation during the first 4 days occurred around 25°C. At much longer incubation times (at least 14 days), maximum sporulation occurred at 15°C for C. acutatum CT and MS, C. gloeosporioides FL, and C. fragariae MS and NC. However, these long durations could not be tested at higher temperatures due to fruit degradation.
Data analysis of sporulation. The polynomial equation that best described the logarithm of sporulation per fruit (log(Y)) in relation to incubation time at each temperature was log(Y) = b0 + b1log(I + 1), in which b0 and b1 are parameters. Generally, a significant and positive relationship was evident between log(Y) and log(I + 1) at the middle temperatures (15 to 30°C). Slopes (b1) were significantly greater than zero (P < 0.05), and R² values at middle temperatures were generally higher than values at the extreme temperatures, re
Fig. 1 illustrates the sporulation of isolates of (A) Colletotrichum acutatum, (B) C. gloeosporioides, and (C) C. fragariae in relation to temperature during incubation. Each data point represents the number of conidia per fruit over the first four days during which spore production occurred. Labels, such as CA, indicate the state of origin. The least significant differences (P = 0.05) for C. acutatum, C. gloeosporioides, and C. fragariae were 0.31, 0.33, and 0.45, respectively, in log units. Fig. 2 presents the sporulation of isolates of Colletotrichum acutatum: (A) OH isolate; (B) CT isolate; (C) CA isolate; (D) MS isolate, at temperatures ranging from 5 to 35°C over incubation time (days). Each point represents the mean number of conidia per fruit across replications, with the least significant differences (P = 0.05) equal to 0.35 in log units. For definitions of isolate-designation abbreviations, refer to Table 1.
Early sporulation, occurring within the first four days after the onset of conidia production, was best represented by the equation log(Y) = b0 + b1T + b2T^3 (equation 4), where b0, b1, and b2 are parameters (as shown in Table 2). This equation, incorporating linear and cubic temperature terms, provided the best fit to data for each species and isolate. While R² values were relatively low, they reflect the fit of the model to individual replicate data over four days rather than just the means shown in Figures 1 to 4. R² values ranged from 11.9% to 52.2%. Based on individual F-tests, significant differences in the model results were observed among the three species (P < 0.05) (Table 2). F-tests also indicated differences among isolates within a species (P < 0.05), reflecting the differences in means described in the previous section. However, no significant differences were noted in model results among repetitions (P > 0.10).
The polynomial model that best described sporulation was of the form log(Y) = b0 + b1I′T + b2I′T^3 + b3I′ (equation 5), where b0 to b3 are parameters (as detailed in Table 3). For improved interpretation, I′ = log[I + 1] + 1 was utilized instead of simply log(I + 1), ensuring that the time variable (I′) was not zero on the first day of sporulation (i.e., I′ = 1 when I = 0, or log[I + 1] = 0). This addition of a constant does not affect the regression goodness-of-fit results. Equation 5 was based on the combined results from equations 3 and 4. Residuals exhibited a random pattern and were normally distributed. The model indicated both linear and cubic relationships between the logarithm of sporulation and temperature, as well as a linear relationship between the logarithm of sporulation and the logarithm of time. Significant differences were found among and within the species (P < 0.05), although some terms were not consistently significant from zero for certain isolates. Only significant terms are included in the results shown in Table 3. No
C. gloeosporioides (FL) 4.17 0.1409 –0.000085 17.8 15.8 0.92 86 (0.528) (0.0353) (0.000020) (NC) 6.08 0.0152 0.000017 20.5 16.4 0.49 41 (1.064) (0.0709) (0.000041)
Analyzed data for the first 4 days after sporulation begins. The first day of sporulation depends on temperature and species. Terms in parentheses are used as isolate designations. The standard error of estimated parameters is shown in parentheses.
The influence of temperature on the latent period for isolates of (A) Colletotrichum acutatum, (B) C. gloeosporioides, and (C) C. fragariae is represented. Each point corresponds to the mean time to first sporulation, with labels indicating the state of origin of isolates.
Sporulation of isolates of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides—(A) FL isolate; (B) NC isolate—and C. fragariae—(C) MS isolate; (D) NC isolate—was examined at temperatures ranging from 5 to 35°C in relation to incubation time (days). Each point reflects the mean number of conidia per fruit for replications. Least significant differences (P = 0.05) for C. gloeosporioides and C. fragariae were 0.46 and 0.58, respectively, in log units.
Equation 5 was generally negative, indicating a decline in sporulation at the highest temperatures. The exception occurred when the b1 parameter estimate was not significantly different from zero. When omitted from the equation, b2 was positive (C. fragariae NC). The b1 and b3 parameters had an inverse relationship; b3 was negative when b1 was above 0.158, not different from zero when b1 was between 0.060 and 0.158, and positive when b1 was below 0.060.
Equation 6 can be expressed as log(Y) = b0 + I ′ (b1T + b2T³ + b3) to demonstrate the linear relationship between the logarithm of sporulation [log(Y)] and transformed incubation time (I ′), with a slope (b1T + b2T³ + b3) dependent on temperature.
There were low and nonsignificant (P > 0.20) correlation coefficients between fruit weight (W) and sporulation based on the data analysis. Correlation coefficients were –0.17, –0.08, 0.04, and 0.15 for C. acutatum OH, C. acutatum MS, C. fragariae MS, and C. gloeosporioides FL, respectively. A positive and significant correlation (P < 0.05) existed between sporulation and the estimated percent area (A) of fruit covered by lesions, with correlation coefficients of 0.47, 0.70, 0.63, and 0.31 for C. acutatum OH, C. acutatum MS, C. fragariae MS, and C. gloeosporioides FL, respectively, indicating a relationship between lesion size and conidia numbers.
Sporulation with free surface moisture on fruit surfaces was similar but slightly less than sporulation without surface moisture. The decline in sporulation was not significantly affected by species or isolates. C. acutatum MS and OH p
Latent period was best described by equation 2 with R² values above 90% for all isolates. All coefficients were significantly different from zero, and there were significant differences (P < 0.05) in the coefficients among isolates and species, mostly due to differences in latent period at low temperatures.
Sporulation on attached fruit showed that there was not a wide enough range of temperatures and incubation times in the controlled-environment chambers to develop a quantitative (i.e., regression) relationship between sporulation on attached fruit and environmental variables. However, substantial sporulation occurred at all temperature/time combinations evaluated. In most cases, measured sporulation was similar to that predicted by equation 5, with the parameters estimated with detached fruit. Almost all cases showed that the 95% prediction interval, based on the model results for detached fruit, included the observed sporulation values. Error in prediction of sporulation was determined as 100[(observed – predicted)/observed], represented in log units for each T/I combination with each isolate. The mean error was –0.7%, with a minimum and maximum of –17.8% and 11.8%. An overall 95% confidence interval for the error was –2.4% to 1.0%, demonstrating somewhat greater overprediction than underprediction with detached fruit results.
In summary, the data showed the estimated parameters for the relationship between log-transformed conidia of Colletotrichum spp. on strawberry fruit, temperature, and a function of incubation time, detailing coefficients of determination and standard errors for various isolates. The analysis indicated that the temperature and its square influenced the latent period, with most isolates demonstrating strong predictive relationships.
Sporulation of Colletotrichum spp. infecting strawberry fruit was strongly influenced by temperature and incubation time. Generally, there was an optimum-type relationship between conidia production and temperature, with maximum sporulation near 25°C, particularly within 4 days of the initiation of conidia production. There was also an increase in conidia production over time, especially at temperatures above 10°C, and the number of conidia was correlated with the percentage of fruit covered by lesions. Furthermore, the time to first sporulation (i.e., latent period) was significantly affected by temperature, with a decreasing latent period as temperature increased. Sporulation of the three species was qualitatively similar but quantitatively distinct, as indicated by the different estimated regression coefficients. The greatest difference occurred between species at 5 and 10°C, where C. acutatum had considerably higher sporulation than the other two species. Moreover, C. acutatum had a shorter latent period at these low temperatures. However, only single isolates of C. gloeosporioides and C. fragariae were tested at temperatures below 15°C. Around 25°C, there was little difference in conidia production among all isolates, with C. gloeosporioides FL showing the lowest sporulation. Latent periods were very similar at 25°C. A polynomial regression model was adequate for describing sporulation (on a log scale) of the isolates of the three species in relation to temperature and incubation time. A polynomial model also provided an excellent description of the latent period in relation to temperature. Although R² values were relatively low, these were based on fitting the equations to individual replicate data, not the means. R² values were close to the R² values, indicating that terms in the model were all significant. The change in sporulation (on a log scale) with incubation time was best represented by a logarithmic function of time. At certain temperatures, log(Y) initially increased quickly at short incubation times and then more slowly at longer times. The rate of increase of log(Y) (i.e., slope) was a direct function of temperature. The maximum slope, and hence the maximum sporulation, is estimated by Topt = (–b1/3b2)¹/², where b1 and b2 are given in the referenced table. Topt is predicted to be 24.1, 23.5, 26.2, and 22.2°C for C. acutatum OH, MS, CA, and CT, respectively, 26.7°C for C. fragariae MS, and 24.3°C for C. gloeosporioides FL. Because of the small number of temperatures tested for the other isolates, estimates of Topt are not meaningful based on these model parameters. The optima were similar and not significantly different from each other. For some isolates (e.g., C. gloeosporioides FL) at long incubation times, the highest sporulation was observed.
The data on sporulation of Colletotrichum spp. infecting strawberry fruit attached to plants in a controlled-environment chamber detail the observed and predicted sporulation (measured as log(conidia per fruit)) across selected temperatures and incubation times. For example, at 15°C after 10 days, *C. acuta
C. acutatum exhibited a range of measurements across various samples. For instance, at MS 15, the average readings were as follows: a mean of 6.65 and 6.75, with a range from 5.6 to 7.8. As the samples increased, such as at 10, the mean shifted to 6.95 and 7.17, with a range of 6.1 to 8.2. This trend continued, with maximum averages recorded at 25, showing a mean of 6.65 and 6.38, and a range from 5.3 to 7.4.
In contrast, C. fragariae also demonstrated variability, with readings at MS 15 recording averages of 6.18 and 6.90, spanning from 5.6 to 8.4. The average readings varied up to a mean of 7.90 and 7.88 at sample 6, indicating a range from 6.5 to 9.3.
For C. gloeosporioides at FL 15, the first readings showed averages of 5.70 and 5.50, with a range of 3.7 to 7.3. The data displayed a noticeable increase in average sporulation, culminating in higher values, with a mean of 7.62 and 7.32 at sample 14.
A prediction was made with equation 5 (as discussed in the text), utilizing parameters from Table 3. It’s important to note that the 95% confidence interval pertains to specific predictions of sporulation at defined temperatures and incubation times rather than the overall mean sporulation. The study confirmed that extended incubation times were only assessed at lower temperatures, as rapid fruit degradation occurred above 20°C. Shorter incubation periods consistently showed higher sporulation rates at 25°C compared to 15°C.
Regression analysis (referenced as equation 6 in Table 3) indicated that the slope was directly influenced by temperature, identifying the optimal range as 22 to 26°C. While the primary data collection involved detached fruit, similar outcomes were observed with infected fruit still attached to plants, as detailed in Table 5. Predictions for conidia production on attached fruit were largely accurate based on models developed for detached fruit. Although the prediction intervals were broad due to data variability, the average deviation between observed and predicted values was minimal, suggesting high accuracy in sporulation predictions. Factors contributing to the observed differences included relative humidity variations and physiological differences between fruit types.
Previous studies, such as those by Wilson et al., highlighted the correlation between temperature, wetness duration, and the infection rates of both mature and immature strawberry fruit, paralleling the findings related to sporulation. The relationship between disease incidence and environmental conditions revealed a polynomial correlation with temperature, establishing the optimum infection temperature between 25 and 30°C. Research on epidemiological processes in Colletotrichum spp. has shown similar trends across different host interactions.
Waller observed an increase in disease incidence in citrus caused by C. gloeosporioides, with an increase in wetness duration after rain events occurring during blossoming periods. Field studies on disease incidence, along with assessments of flower development, blossom patterns, and climatic data, were used in their observations. Fitzell et al. developed a polynomial model based on laboratory studies that predicted infection of mangoes by C. gloeosporioides var. minor based on both temperature and wetness duration. The model accounted for 87% of total variation based on laboratory results. A similar relation was found by Dodd et al. The optimum temperature for infection was around 25°C. Similar results for optimum temperature were found for other crops. For instance, Nair and Corbin incubated pine needles (Pinus radiata) with conidia of C. acutatum f. sp. pinea and noted that conidia germinated within 6 hours at an optimum of 25°C, with appressoria formation following within 24 hours. O’Connell et al. reported that conidia of C. truncatum, which infects pea (Pisum sativum), germinated within 4 hours of incubation at 25°C, and appressoria formed 10 to 15 hours afterward. Timmer and Zitko did not find a relationship between temperature and postbloom fruit drop of citrus, caused by C. acutatum, but their study was based on correlations of field observations. It is possible that the Florida ambient temperatures were relatively close to the optimum during the growing seasons, and thus would not be correlated with disease in the field. Surprisingly, free surface moisture was not required for sporulation. Free moisture is required for infection of fruit by C. acutatum and is needed for sporulation of many other fungal pathogens of fruit. Related to this, Nicholson and Moraes concluded that density of conidia in acervuli of C. graminicola, the cause of anthracnose of corn, was greater under high relative humidity than low relative humidity due to lack of desiccation of the spore matrix. Although research has been reported on spore germination and dispersal, surprisingly, there have been few published reports on the influence of environmental conditions directly on spore production. Thus, it is not known if other Colletotrichum species are affected by moisture in a similar manner. We speculate that the pathogen obtains sufficient moisture from the ripening strawberry fruit to produce conidia. As with sporulation, the latent period was described by a polynomial function of temperature. With this equation, the estimate of optimum temperature for latent period is given by –b1/2b2. With the estimated parameters, the optimum temperature for C. acutatum was predicted to be 26 to 29°C, with one exception. Due to the small numbers of temperatures tested, estimated coefficients for other species are not reliable. In general, no clear differences among isolates or species could be found in latent period around the optimum temperature. Although these estimated temperature optima for latent period are not significantly different from each other, they were similar to the optimum for infection. However, there was a trend for these temperature values to be somewhat larger than the estimated optima for sporulation found here. Results from this study, along with works from previous researchers, may explain the increasing importance of C. acutatum in the north. Once introduced in an area, C. acutatum could have distinct advantages over other strawberry-infecting species of Colletotrichum at cooler temperatures, conditions that are normal for northern regions. Two of these advantages are the short latent period for C. acutatum and the greater production of spores at lower temperatures
Bonde, M. R., Peterson, G. L., and Maas, J. L. 1991. Isozyme comparisons for identification of Colletotrichum species pathogenic to strawberry. Phytopathology 81:1523-1528.
Brooks, A. N. 1935. Anthracnose and wilt of strawberry caused by Colletotrichum fragariae. Phytopathology 25:973-974.
Bulger, M. A., Ellis, M. A., and Madden, L. V. 1987. Influence of temperature and wetness duration on infection of strawberry flowers by Botrytis cinerea and disease incidence of fruit originating from infected flowers. Phytopathology 77:1225-1230.
Campbell, C. L., and Madden, L. V. 1990. Introduction to Plant Disease Epidemiology. Wiley-Interscience, New York.
Denham, T. G., and Waller, J. M. 1981. Some epidemiological aspects of postbloom fruit drop disease (Colletotrichum gloeosporioides) in citrus. Ann. Appl. Biol. 98:65-77.
Dodd, J. C., Estrada, A. B., Matcham, J., Jeffries, P., and Jeger, M. J. 1991. The effect of climatic factors on Colletotrichum gloeosporioides, the causal agent of mango anthracnose, in the Philippines. Plant Pathol. 40:568-575.
Eastburn, D. M., and Gubler, W. D. 1990. Strawberry anthracnose: Detection and survival of Colletotrichum acutatum in soil. Plant Dis. 74:161-163.
Eastburn, D. M., and Gubler, W. D. 1992. Effects of soil moisture and temperature on the survival of Colletotrichum acutatum. Plant Dis. 76:841-842.
Fitzell, R. D., Peak, C. M., and Darnell, R. E. 1984. A model for estimating infection levels of anthracnose disease of mango. Ann. Appl. Biol. 104:451-458.
Grove, G. G., Madden, L. V., and Ellis, M. A. 1985. Influence of temperature and wetness duration on sporulation of Phytophthora cactorum on infected strawberry fruit. Phytopathology 75:700-703.
Gubler, W. D., and Eastburn, D. M. 1988. Research progress report: Anthracnose in California. Adv. Strawb. Prod. 7:47-50.
Gunnell, P. S., and Gubler, W. D. 1982. Taxonomy and morphology of Colletotrichum species pathogenic to strawberry. Mycologia 84:157-165.
Howard, C. M., and Albregts, E. E. 1983. Black leaf spot phase of strawberry anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum gloeosporioides (= C. fragariae). Plant Dis. 67:1144-1146.
Howard, C. M., Mass, J. L., Chandler, C. K., and Albregts, E. E. 1992. Anthracnose of strawberry caused by the Colletotrichum complex in Florida. Plant Dis. 76:976-981.
King, W. T. 1995. Effects of temperature and wetness duration on immature strawberry fruit infected by Colletotrichum species. M.S. thesis. The Ohio State University, Wooster.
Lalancette, N., Madden, L. V., and Ellis, M. A. 1988. A quantitative model for describing the sporulation of Plasmopara vitic
