Epidemiology and Pathology of Strawberry Anthracnose: A North American Perspective
Barbara J. Smith
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Thad Cochran Southern Horticultural Laboratory, Small Fruit Research Unit, P.O. Box 287, Poplarville, MS 39470
Additional index words: Colletotrichum acutatum, C. fragariae, C. gloeosporioides, Fragaria × ananassa, disease control, fungicides
Abstract: Three Colletotrichum species—Colletotrichum acutatum J.H. Simmonds (teleomorph Glomerella acutata J.C. Guerber & J.C. Correll), Colletotrichum fragariae A.N. Brooks, and Colletotrichum gloeosporioides (Penz.) Penz. & Sacc. in Penz. [teleomorph Glomerella cingulata (Stoneman) Spauld. & H. Schrenk]—are major pathogens of strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa). Strawberry anthracnose crown rot has been a destructive disease in commercial strawberry fields in the southeastern United States since the 1930s. The causal fungus, C. fragariae, can infect all aboveground plant parts; however, the disease is most severe when it infects the crown, causing crown rot, wilt, and death. Colletotrichum gloeosporioides was responsible for an epidemic of anthracnose crown rot in strawberry nurseries in Arkansas and North Carolina in the late 1970s. The anthracnose fruit rot pathogen, C. acutatum, was first reported in 1986 on strawberry in the United States. Since the 1980s, increased losses due to anthracnose fruit and crown rots in the United States may be related to changes in cultivars and to the widespread use of annual plasticulture production rather than the matted-row production system. Investigations into anthracnose in the United States have focused on its epidemiology and the differences among the three causal Colletotrichum species regarding their cultural, morphological, and molecular characteristics; their infection processes; and their pathogenicity. Results from these studies have improved the understanding of the diseases and enhanced disease control strategies. Strawberries grown in soils with high nitrogen levels are more susceptible to anthracnose than those grown in soils with lower nitrogen levels or those amended with calcium nitrate. The disease spreads more rapidly in fields with overhead irrigation and plastic mulch than in fields using drip irrigation and straw mulch. The efficacy of fungicides has been assessed in in-vitro, greenhouse, and field studies, revealing some resistance of pathogens to certain fungicides. Developing anthracnose-resistant cultivars is a primary objective of most strawberry breeding programs in the southern United States.
Colletotrichum species cause serious diseases of many fruit and vegetable crops worldwide, with three species—C. fragariae, C. acutatum, and C. gloeosporioides—responsible for anthracnose diseases in strawberries. Since the 1930s, anthracnose crown rot caused by C. fragariae and C. gloeosporioides has been a destructive issue in strawberry nurseries and fruit production fields in the southeastern United States. The presence of the anthracnose fruit rot pathogen, C. acutatum, was first reported on
Colletotrichum fragariae, C. acutatum, and C. gloeosporioides cause anthracnose diseases of strawberries. C. fragariae was assumed to be the causal agent of strawberry anthracnose in the United States until 1986 when Smith and Black reported the presence of C. acutatum on strawberries in the United States. This fungus had previously been reported to cause anthracnose fruit rot of strawberry in Queensland, Australia; however, it had probably been present in the United States for some time under the name of Gloeosporium spp. Colletotrichum gloeosporioides causes anthracnose crown rot, petiole lesions, and leaf spots indistinguishable from those caused by C. fragariae. In a series of comparative studies of these three major causal agents of strawberry anthracnose, Smith and Black examined the cultural characteristics, conidia, appressoria, and setae of 24 Colletotrichum isolates. Colletotrichum fragariae isolates developed beige to olive to dark gray colonies, did not form the ascigerous state in culture, and their conidia were typically cylindrical with one end sharply tapered and the other end rounded. Colletotrichum gloeosporioides isolates were very similar, except they formed the Glomerella cingulata ascigerous state in culture, and their conidia were usually rounded on both ends. Isolates of both C. fragariae and C. gloeosporioides produced dark black setae, visible with a hand lens, in acervuli in culture and on petiole, stolon, and fruit lesions. Colletotrichum acutatum isolates produced fusiform conidia tapered on both ends, developed white, pink, orange, rose, or beige colonies, and did not form setae or the ascigerous state in culture. The growth rate of C. acutatum in culture was slower than the other two species at all temperatures tested, with the greatest difference being at 32 °C. Colletotrichum fragariae, the “original” anthracnose fungus, was first identified in Florida in 1931. It spread throughout the southeastern United States and was responsible for crown rot and death of many plants in strawberry nurseries in the 1970s. It has a narrow host range, infecting only strawberries and a few weed hosts, and is rarely found outside the southeastern United States. Colletotrichum fragariae generally causes more severe petiole and crown symptoms than C. acutatum, and C. fragariae is considered by some to be a host-specific or conspecific form of C. gloeosporioides. In the late 1970s, C. gloeosporioides was identified as the causal agent on plants obtained from Arkansas and North Carolina nurseries that died from a crown rot identical to that caused by C. fragariae. It has a wide host and geographic range, causing diseases of many plant hosts worldwide. The greatest economic losses due to anthracnose on strawberries are from fruit rot caused by C. acutatum, which also infects many other fruit and vegetable crops, including apples, tomatoes, peppers, peaches, blueberries, blackberries, and grapes. The presence of the pathogen has been reported on strawberries in almost all areas of the world where they are grown. Crown infections of strawberry plants by C. acutatum often result in stunted plants rather than plant death. Infected plants usually do not thrive
Historically, C. acutatum has been considered the anthracnose fruit-rotting pathogen, and C. fragariae and C. gloeosporioides have been associated with petiole and stolon lesions and crown rot. However, all three species may cause similar symptoms and can be found on the same plant (Howard et al., 1992). Identification of these pathogens should be based on classical taxonomic characteristics or molecular techniques, not symptoms. Results from several studies suggest that C. acutatum may have evolved into a subgroup that is highly virulent and host-specific to strawberries. In one of these studies (Denoyes-Rothan et al., 2002), 95 isolates of Colletotrichum, including 81 isolates of C. acutatum (62 from strawberry) and 14 isolates of C. gloeosporioides (13 from strawberry), were characterized by various molecular methods and pathogenicity tests. Results based on random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) polymorphism and internal transcribed spacer 2 (ITS2) sequence data provided genetic evidence of two subgroups within C. acutatum. The first subgroup, characterized as CA-clonal, included only isolates from strawberry and exhibited identical RAPD patterns and nearly identical ITS2 sequence analyses. A larger genetic group, CA-variable, included isolates from various hosts and exhibited variable RAPD patterns and divergent ITS2 sequence analysis. Based on these molecular data, Denoyes-Rothan et al. (2002) proposed that the CA-clonal subgroup contained closely related, highly virulent C. acutatum isolates that may have developed host specialization to strawberry. Isolates of Colletotrichum spp. have been disseminated worldwide, probably through international plant exchanges, as their genetic polymorphism and geographical origins are not correlated (Denoyes-Rothan et al., 2002; Sreenivasaprasad and Talhinhas, 2005).
Anthracnose Disease Symptoms
Anthracnose crown rot (Smith, 1998a), caused by either C. fragariae or C. gloeosporioides, is first apparent by the wilting of the youngest leaves in the hottest part of the day. The young wilted leaves may appear to recover and become turgid in the evenings; however, most will wilt and die after a few days. Shortly after plants wilt, a red discoloration appears within the crown tissue, and the causal pathogen may be isolated from discolored tissue. After the plants have been dead for several days, the crown tissue will turn dark brown to black, and then Colletotrichum spp. are difficult to isolate. Colletotrichum acutatum may also cause crown death; however, typically a single side of the crown is infected rather than the entire crown, and infected plants are stunted but do not die. Each of the three *Collet
C. acutatum and C. fragariae were studied using light and electron microscopy. Both fungal species invaded the host tissue in a similar manner; however, C. fragariae invaded the plants more rapidly than C. acutatum. Both species penetrated the cuticle via an appressorium, and their hyphae grew within the cuticle and cell walls of epidermal, subepidermal, and subtending cells. They began invasion with a brief biotrophic phase, in which they invaded living cells, before entering an extended necrotrophic phase, where they proliferated among dead cells. Acervuli formed once the cortical tissue had been moderately disrupted and developed as a stroma just beneath the outer periclinal epidermal walls. Acervuli erupted through the cuticle and released conidia. Invasion of the vascular tissue typically occurred after acervuli matured but remained minimal. The time from infection of the strawberry by Colletotrichum spp. to first sporulation (the latent period) is an important factor in the speed at which anthracnose may spread within a field. The latent period depends on the temperature and ranges from 2–3 days at 25 °C to 6–17 days at 5 °C. At 5 and 10 °C, the latent period was shorter for C. acutatum than for C. gloeosporioides and C. fragariae; however, at higher temperatures, the latent period for all species was similar. Appressoria and secondary conidia produced by C. acutatum on symptomless foliage may be a significant source of inoculum for fruit infections and may also contribute to the availability of inoculum throughout the growing season. Conidial germination, appressorial production, and secondary conidiation are all favored by longer periods of wetness than the 4 hours required for secondary conidia to form. Colletotrichum acutatum survived up to 8 weeks on leaves in greenhouse studies and up to 5 weeks on fabric. More conidia formed on leaves when exposed to flower extracts than when exposed to leaf extracts or water, suggesting that C. acutatum inoculum levels on strawberry foliage may increase during flowering. Rain splash is the primary means by which Colletotrichum spp. conidia are spread from plant to plant in the field. It was found that anthracnose fruit rot incidence generally declined as plant density increased, concluding that plant density reduced the amount of rain that penetrated the plant canopy, thus reducing splash. Most fruit infection occurred within a 25-cm radius of the source of the inoculum, which was an infected fruit. A study on splash dispersal of the conidia of the three Colletotrichum spp. found that conidia of C. fragariae dispersed over the shortest distance, while those of C. acutatum dispersed over the longest distance, likely due to the greater number of spores produced on infected fruit by C. acutatum. Colletotrichum acutatum conidia may survive in soil and plant debris under dry conditions for up to 12 months, but conidia and sclerotia die rapidly under moist conditions, i.e., soil moisture below 12%.
Anthracnose Cultural Control Measures: Because the primary source of infection in most fruiting fields appeared to be infected transplants, strawberry growers in the southeastern United States were advised, after the anthracnose crown rot epidemics in the 1980s, to obtain their transplants from nurseries in the northern United States, Canada, or California that were believed to be outside the range of C. fragariae. More recently, C. acutatum has been found in some of
(1992a) demonstrated that anthracnose-free transplants can be produced in the southeastern United States by locating nurseries in areas where strawberries are not grown commercially. Disease-free transplants remain the primary control method for anthracnose crown rot and fruit rot. Because Colletotrichum spp. may infect many other hosts, primary infection in strawberry fields is sometimes assumed to originate from these other hosts growing nearby. To test the hypothesis that Colletotrichum spp. may transfer from other fruit or vegetable hosts to strawberries, 37 Colletotrichum isolates, representing nine species collected from 12 hosts, were wound-inoculated onto the leaves and stems of strawberry, blueberry, blackberry, muscadine grape, tomato, and pepper (Smith, 2002). Colletotrichum fragariae isolates were the most aggressive, causing lesions at an average of 38% of inoculation sites on all hosts except pepper. The percentages of infection for the other species were 25% for Colletotrichum capsici, 18% for C. gloeosporioides, 15% for C. acutatum, 11% for C. destructivum, 9% for C. truncatum, 8% for C. coccodes, 6% for C. higginsianum, and 5% for C. orbiculare. Strawberry was the most susceptible host, with 58% of petiole and 14% of leaf inoculations of all isolates resulting in lesion development. Pepper was the most resistant host, showing no symptom development on leaves or stems following inoculation with any isolate. These results suggest that primary anthracnose infections in strawberry fields most often originate from infected strawberry transplants and only rarely from other diseased fruit or vegetable hosts. Anthracnose spreads within a field through splashing water, and living mulches (such as wheat, rye, or ryegrass) in row middles have been shown to reduce disease spread within a field. Sublethal doses of grass-specific herbicides, such as sethoxydim, may be used to prevent excessive growth of ryegrass (Gupton, 2000). Organic mulches, such as wheat straw or pine needles, will also reduce splash and result in a lower incidence of anthracnose compared to rows mulched with plastic (Madden, 1992; Smith and Spiers, 1986). Anthracnose is less severe when water is supplied to plants using drip irrigation rather than overhead irrigation (Madden, 1992; Smith and Spiers, 1986). Anthracnose crown rot was observed to be less severe in commercial fields when strawberries were grown in soils with low nitrogen fertility (Howard et al., 1992). In greenhouse studies, Smith (1987, 1989) determined that strawberries grown in soils with high levels of nitrogen, especially from ammonium sources, are more susceptible to anthracnose than plants grown in soils with lower nitrogen levels or those with high levels of calcium nitrate. Anthracnose fruit rot caused by C. acutatum was less severe on fruit from greenhouse-grown plants receiving drench or foliar applications of calcium sulfate than on fruit from plants receiving water, calcium chloride, or calcium nitrate treatments. Fruit from plants receiving foliar applications of CaCl2 developed less fruit rot than that from plants receiving soil applications of CaCl2 (Smith and Gupton, 1993). The primary means to reduce the buildup of anthracnose fruit rot in the field is to harvest fruit frequently and remove all rotten fruit from the field. Following severe infections early in the fruiting season, all infected fruit should be stripped from the plants and removed from the field. Infected areas of a field should be harvested last in the day, or workers should wash up and change into clean clothes when they must enter uninfected areas of the field after harvesting areas where fruit rot is present. IN-VITRO FUNGICIDE STUDIES
Until highly resistant cultivars are available, growers must rely on chemical applications and cultural practices to reduce losses due to anthracnose. The failure of fungicides to control anthracnose epidemics may be due to the development of fungicide resistance in the Colletotrichum spp. population. For example, benomyl was shown to effectively reduce the incidence of anthracnose crown rot and was used intensively by strawberry growers for years to control anthracnose and other diseases. However, the anthracnose pathogens, C. acutatum and C. fragariae, developed resistance to it and other benzimidazole fungicides, and benomyl was no longer effective for anthracnose control in strawberry fields. In vitro trials have been used to screen fungicides for their ability to control anthracnose. Researchers reported that all tested C. acutatum isolates, 14 out of 18 C. fragariae isolates, and both C. gloeosporioides isolates were resistant to benomyl. Additionally, all benomyl-resistant isolates were also resistant to carbendazim, which belongs to the same class of fungicides. In a greenhouse study, plants treated with propiconazole had lower disease severity ratings than those treated with captafol or benomyl. However, the propiconazole-treated plants were shorter with dark green leaves that appeared thicker than the leaves of untreated plants.
Sixteen different fungicide treatments were evaluated in five studies conducted at Hammond, LA, and Poplarville, MS, during the 2002, 2003, and 2005 fruiting seasons. Treatments were applied at 7- to 10-day intervals to three strawberry cultivars. The most frequent fruit rots at harvest were anthracnose fruit rot (caused by Colletotrichum spp.), stem end rot (caused by Gnomonia comari), and Botrytis gray mold (caused by Botrytis cinerea). Compared with the untreated control, less anthracnose fruit rot occurred on berries from the pyraclostrobin + boscalid, cyprodinil + fludioxonil, azoxystrobin, pyraclostrobin, captan + fenhexamid, and captan treatments.
In the early 1980s, when anthracnose became a major disease of strawberries in the southeastern United States, a breeding program to develop anthracnose-resistant cultivars adapted to the region was instituted by the USDA-ARS at the Small Fruit Research Station in Poplarville, MS, and the Fruit Laboratory in Beltsville, MD, with the collaboration of state experiment stations in Florida, Louisiana, and North Carolina. From 1976 to 1995, over 160,000 progeny from 448 crosses made at Beltsville were screened for anthracnose resistance in the greenhouse at Poplarville. Initially, parent lines were eastern cultivars and advanced selections from the breeding program at Beltsville. As the program progressed, resistant selections from the anthracnose program were crossed with commercial cultivars to improve the horticultural characteristics of the progeny. Seed from the crosses made at Beltsville were germinated at Poplarville, and resultant seedlings were inoculated with a conidial suspension of C. fragariae, incubated in a dew chamber for 48 hours, moved to a warm greenhouse, and rated for anthracnose severity 30 days after inoculation. Resistant seedlings were evaluated in the field in Flor
Mississippi, Maryland, and North Carolina; selections were made on the basis of yield, fruit quality, plant habit, and resistance to leaf scorch, leaf spot, powdery mildew, and two-spotted spider mites. Fifteen hundred fifteen anthracnose-resistant selections were made from the seedlings field-tested in Mississippi. Four of these anthracnose-resistant strawberry clones were released as breeding lines and have been used as a source of anthracnose resistance in several breeding programs. Smith et al. released the cultivar Pelican, which is highly resistant to both anthracnose crown rot and anthracnose fruit rot. ‘Pelican’ is also resistant to five races of red stele. Evaluation of strawberry seedlings and advanced breeding lines from state and private breeding programs is an ongoing project. The USDA anthracnose-resistance screening procedure has effectively identified resistant genotypes in seedling progenies from the North Carolina State University breeding program, with over 32,000 resistant strawberry seedlings identified between 1998 and 1999. Smith and Black found that resistance to anthracnose was influenced by environmental conditions after inoculation and that plants incubated at a high temperature for 48 hours in a dew chamber had higher disease severity ratings compared with those incubated at lower temperatures. Plants maintained in a greenhouse at a high temperature after dew chamber incubation developed more severe symptoms than those held at a lower temperature. Two- to four-week-old strawberry seedlings were more susceptible to anthracnose than 14- to 18-week-old seedlings when inoculated with a conidial suspension. Tissue culture-induced variation is another strategy being pursued for generating disease-resistant genotypes. Hammerschlag et al. screened shoots regenerated from leaf explants of six commercially important cultivars for resistance to a virulent isolate of anthracnose. Somaclones with higher levels of anthracnose resistance were identified for all the cultivars, with the greatest increases observed for somaclones of Chandler, Pelican, and Sweet Charlie, where resistance increased twelvefold. These studies provide evidence that in-vitro screening can be used to evaluate strawberry germplasm for anthracnose resistance and that somaclonal variation is influenced by strawberry genotype. Gupton and Smith determined that the estimates of dominance genetic variance were six to ten times higher than those for additive genetic variance. The frequency distribution of disease severity ratings was bimodal, suggesting major gene action. Narrow-sense heritability estimates of 0.37 and 0.26 were probably sufficient to produce gains from recurrent selection, while gains from selection of clonal value should be possible because of the high broad-sense heritability estimates.
Ballington (2002) found that nonadditive effects were more important than additive effects in the inheritance of resistance in runners. The epistatic nature of anthracnose resistance in runners appears to be supported by the results of crosses between susceptible parents, which resulted in up to 20% resistant seedlings (Ballington et al., 2002). Giménez and Ballington (2002) indicated that the frequency distribution of lesion lengths within progenies suggests that resistance to Colletotrichum acutatum on runners is quantitative. Results from Garcés et al. (2002) also support the theory that the inheritance of resistance to anthracnose is quantitative in nature. Increased losses due to anthracnose fruit and crown rots may be related to the shift from matted-row culture to the annual plasticulture production system in the United States. Breeding for genetic resistance to anthracnose and the development of resistant cultivars are primary means of reducing economic losses due to this disease, which is environmentally sound as it leads to reduced fungicide use.
As our knowledge of the anthracnose pathogens and the epidemiology of anthracnose diseases has increased, so has our ability to control these diseases. Changes in cultural practices have resulted in reduced disease levels. Concurrently, the development of more effective fungicides and their registration for use on strawberries have greatly reduced losses due to both anthracnose crown rot and fruit rot. Anthracnose-resistant cultivars have also reduced economic losses associated with these diseases. Nevertheless, growers may still experience severe losses when environmental factors are highly favorable for anthracnose development.
Control of the crown rot phase of strawberry anthracnose through sanitation, breeding for resistance, and benomyl. Plant Dis. Rep. 56:515–519. Howard, C.M. 1971. Control of strawberry anthracnose with benomyl. Plant Dis. Rep. 55:139–141. Howard, C.M. 1983. Black leaf spot phase of strawberry anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum gloeosporioides (= C. fragariae). Plant Dis. 67:1144–1146. Howard, C.M., J.L. Maas, C.K. Chandler, and E.E. Albregts. 1992. Anthracnose of strawberry caused by the Colletotrichum complex in Florida. Plant Dis. 76:976–981. King, W.T., L.V. Madden, M.A. Ellis, and L.L. Wilson. 1997. Effects of temperature on sporulation and latent period of Colletotrichum spp. infecting strawberry fruit. Plant Dis. 81:77–84. LaMondia, J.A. 1993. In vitro evaluation of fungicides against Colletotrichum acutatum isolates from strawberry. Adv. Strawberry Res. 12:34–37. LaMondia, J.A. 1995. Inhibition with benomyl of growth in vitro of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. fragariae and strawberry fruit infection by benomyl-resistant isolates of Colletotrichum acutatum. Adv. Strawberry Res. 14:25–30. Leandro, L.F.S., M.L. Gleason, F.W. Nutter, Jr., S.N. Wegulo, and P.M. Dixon. 2001. Germination and sporulation of Colletotrichum acutatum on symptomless strawberry leaves. Phytopathology 91:659–664. Leandro, L.F.S., M.L. Gleason, F.W. Nutter, Jr., S.N. Wegulo, and P.M. Dixon. 2003a. Influence of temperature and wetness duration on conidia and appressoria of Colletotrichum acutatum on symptomless strawberry leaves. Phytopathology 93:513–520. Leandro, L.F.S., M.L. Gleason, F.W. Nutter, Jr., S.N. Wegulo, and P.M. Dixon. 2003b. Strawberry plant extracts stimulate secondary conidiation by Colletotrichum acutatum on symptomless leaves. Phytopathology 93:1285–1291. Maas, J.L. 1984. Anthracnose fruit rot (black spot), p. 57–60. In: J.L. Maas (ed.). Compendium of strawberry diseases. American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. Maas, J.L. and M.E. Palm. 1997. Occurrence of anthracnose irregular leaf spot, caused by Colletotrichum acutatum, on strawberry in Maryland. Adv. Strawberry Res. 16:68–70. Madden, L.V. 1992. Rainfall and the dispersal of fungal spores. Adv. Plant Pat
Smith, B.J. 1998b. Anthracnose fruit rot (black spot), p. 31–33. In: J.L. Maas (ed.). Compendium of strawberry diseases. 2nd ed. American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. Smith, B.J. 1998c. Anthracnose leaf spot and irregular leaf spot, p. 24–25. In: J.L. Maas (ed.). Compendium of strawberry diseases. 2nd ed. American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. Smith, B.J. 2002. Susceptibility of vegetative tissues of fruit and vegetable hosts to infection by various Colletotrichum species. Acta Hort. 567:631–634. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1986. First report of Colletotrichum acutatum on strawberry in the United States. Plant Dis. 70:1074. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1987. Resistance of strawberry plants to Colletotrichum fragariae affected by environmental conditions. Plant Dis. 71:834–837. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1990. Morphological, cultural, and pathogenic variation among Colletotrichum species isolated from strawberry. Plant Dis. 74:69–76. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1991. Greenhouse efficacy of fungicides for control of anthracnose crown rot of strawberry, p. 221–223. In: A. Dale and J. Lubby (eds.). The strawberry into the 21st century. Timber Press, Portland, OR. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1992. In vitro activity of fungicides against Colletotrichum fragariae. Acta Hort. 348:509–512. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1993. In vitro fungicide studies show the occurrence of benomyl-resistant Colletotrichum spp. from strawberry. Adv. Strawberry Res. 12:42–48. Smith, B.J., L.L. Black, and G.J. Galletta. 1990. Resistance to Colletotrichum fragariae in strawberry affected by seedling age and inoculation method. Plant Dis. 74:1016–1021. Smith, B.J. and C.L. Gupton. 1993. Calcium applications before harvest affect the severity of anthracnose fruit rot in greenhouse-grown strawberries. Acta Hort. 348:477–482. Smith, B.J., C.L. Gupton, G.J. Galletta, J.L. Maas, J.M. Enns, J.R. Ballington, Jr., R.J. Constantin, T.J. DiVittorio, and D. Himelrick. 1998. ‘Pelican’ strawberry. HortScience 33:1082–1084. Smith, B.J. and J.M. Spiers. 1982. Evaluating techniques for screening strawberry seedlings for resistance to Colletotrichum fragariae. Plant Dis. 66:559–561. Smith, B.J. and J.M. Spiers. 1986. Influence of mulch and irrigation types on strawberry anthracnose crown rot. HortScience 21:946 (abstr.). Sreenivasaprasad, S. and P. Talhinhas. 2005. Genotypic and phenotypic diversity in Colletotrichum acutatum, a cosmopolitan pathogen causing anthracnose on a wide range of hosts. Mol. Plant Pathol. 6
