Germination and Sporulation of Colletotrichum acutatum on Symptomless Strawberry Leaves
L. F. S. Leandro, M. L. Gleason, F. W. Nutter, Jr., S. N. Wegulo, and P. M. Dixon
First, second, third, and fourth authors: Department of Plant Pathology, Iowa State University, Ames 50011; fifth author: Department of Statistics, Iowa State University, Ames 50011.
Accepted for publication 28 March 2001.
ABSTRACT
Leandro, L. F. S., Gleason, M. L., Nutter, F. W., Jr., Wegulo, S. N., and Dixon, P. M. 2001. Germination and sporulation of Colletotrichum acutatum on symptomless strawberry leaves. Phytopathology 91:659-664.
The germination and sporulation of Colletotrichum acutatum were characterized over time on strawberry leaves (cv. Tristar) and plastic coverslips incubated at 26°C under continuous wetness. Conidia germinated within 3 hours after inoculation and formed melanized appressoria with pores by 9 hours after inoculation. Host penetration was not observed up to 7 days after inoculation. Production of secondary conidia on conidial and hyphal phialides began within 6 hours after inoculation. Secondary conidiation was responsible for up to a threefold increase in the total number of conidia within 7 days after inoculation. Primary conidia and hyphae began to collapse 48 hours after inoculation, whereas melanized appressoria remained intact. These findings suggest that appressoria and secondary conidia of C. acutatum produced on symptomless strawberry foliage may be significant sources of inoculum for fruit infections.
Additional keywords: anthracnose, microcyclic conidiation, phyllosphere ecology.
Anthracnose, caused by Colletotrichum acutatum J. H. Simmonds, is responsible for major losses in strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa Duch.) production worldwide. Fruit rot and flower blight are common symptoms in fruiting fields, whereas lesions on stolons, petioles, and leaves are particularly damaging in plant nurseries. C. acutatum may also cause crown rot and plant death in some regions.
The pathogen is apparently introduced into production fields on infected or infested propagation material. During warm, moist periods, lesions formed on transplants produce abundant conidia that are splash-dispersed onto flowers and fruits, resulting in new infections. However, when epidemics develop in fields where symptomless propagation material was planted, the source of initial inoculum is not clearly identifiable. It has been suggested that the fungus is transported in infested soil attached to strawberry crowns, but the form and fate of fungal propagules from this potential inoculum source were not reported. Several studies have suggested that C. acutatum can develop quiescent infections on strawberry plants, but the epidemiological role of such infections prior to colonization of fruits and senescing foliage has not been investigated.
The histology of infection by Colletotric
Symptomless foliage harbors inoculum for fruit and flower infections of several Colletotrichum spp. Pantidou and Schroeder demonstrated that conidia of C. phomoides harvested from symptomless tomato leaves were able to cause infections on tomato fruit. On citrus, C. acutatum survived on leaves as quiescent appressoria. These appressoria could be stimulated to germinate directly and produce secondary conidia that served as inoculum for flower infections. It has also been suggested that quiescent infections on strawberry leaves can provide inoculum for strawberry anthracnose epidemics. However, the potential for inoculum production on symptomless strawberry leaves has not been examined. A better understanding of the ecology of C. acutatum on strawberry foliage prior to the development of fruit rot symptoms may provide insights to improve management of strawberry anthracnose. The objective of this study was to characterize and quantify germination and sporulation of C. acutatum on symptomless strawberry foliage during periods of leaf wetness. A preliminary report has been published.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Plant production and maintenance: Day-neutral strawberry crowns (cv. Tristar) were planted in 15-cm-diameter plastic pots containing a 1:2:1 mixture of peat, perlite, and soil, and grown in a greenhouse maintained at 25 ± 4°C with a 16-h photoperiod. The plants were drip irrigated and fertilized weekly with a solution of 21-5-20 fertilizer (400 ppm N). For each experiment, newly unfurled leaves were tagged 7 to 10 days before sampling to ensure uniformity of leaf age at sampling.
Inoculum production: Isolate HF-ac-98 of C. acutatum was obtained from an infected strawberry fruit collected at the Iowa State University Horticulture Research Farm near Gilbert. The isolate was grown on potato dextrose agar (PDA) amended with 150 ppm of streptomycin and 150 ppm of tetracycline and transferred to silica gel for long-term storage. All cultures used for inoculum preparation were started by depositing infested silica gel crystals on PDA plates and culturing at 26°C in darkness until conidia developed. Conidia collected from PDA cultures were seeded onto strawberry fruit agar (SFA) prepared with 200 ml of blended, pesticide-free, ripe strawberries (cv. Tristar), 20 g of agar, 3 g of CaCO3, and 800 ml of distilled water (pH 5.5 to 6.0).
Conidial suspensions used for inoculations were prepared from 7-day-old cultures grown on SFA at 26°C in darkness. Each SFA culture plate was flooded with 9 ml of sterile deionized water and scraped with a rubber policeman to dislodge conidia. The resulting conidial suspension was filtered through two layers of cheesecloth into a flask, and the conidia were washed by centrifuging twice at 3,020 × g for 2 min, discarding the supernatant, and resuspending the conidial pellet in sterile deionized water each time. The final conidial suspension was adjusted to 5 × 10^5 conidia per ml for leaf inoculations and 5 × 10^3 c
Approximately 5 ml of conidial suspension was sprayed over a 20 × 30 cm area, achieving an average application of 40 conidia per mm². The leaves and wire mesh were returned to the crispers, sealed in plastic bags to maintain 100% relative humidity, and incubated at 26°C in darkness. Four leaves were sampled arbitrarily at 0, 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 24, 36, 48, 72, 96, 120, 144, and 168 hours after inoculation. Two leaf disks were excised from each leaf, one on either side of the central vein of the middle leaflet, using a 1-cm-diameter cork borer. The disks were fixed in 2% glutaraldehyde for 3 hours and cleared in saturated chloral hydrate (200 g per 20 ml of deionized water) for 5 days. After mounting the disks on a drop of Hoyer’s medium and staining with 0.1% aniline blue in lactophenol, they were observed under a differential interference contrast microscope for conidial germination. The total number of germinated and ungerminated conidia was counted in each of 16 microscope fields (×500) observed on each leaf disk. These fields were selected by visually dividing a leaf disk into four quadrants and arbitrarily selecting four fields in each quadrant. A conidium was considered germinated when it formed either a germ tube at least as long as its width, an appressorium, or a conidial phialide. Appressoria that were unmelanized, melanized without an appressorial pore, or melanized with an appressorial pore were also counted. An appressorium was defined as a globose, septum-delimited structure that formed either on a hyphal tip or was sessile to a conidium. Dark brown appressoria were considered melanized, and appressorial pores were identified as small, basal, hyaline openings at the center of an appressorium. Data were converted to an area basis (square millimeters) by dividing the total number of conidia or appressoria in each leaf disk by the area of 16 microscope fields observed per disk. Eight disks were counted at each sampling time, and the experiment was repeated once.
Leaves inoculated as described previously were incubated for 24 hours and prepared for scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Leaf disks were fixed overnight at 4°C in cacodylate buffer (pH 7.4) containing 2% glutaraldehyde and 2% paraformaldehyde, rinsed in buffer, and processed through graded alcohols to 100%. The disks were critical point dried in a Denton Critical Point Drying Apparatus DCP-1, mounted on aluminum stubs, and coated with a gold-palladium alloy to a thickness of approximately 300 angstroms on a Desk II Cold Sputter/Etch Unit. Microscopic observations were conducted with a JEOL SEM (JSM-5800LV) at 10 kV.
Coverslip inoculation. Conidial germination was studied on plastic coverslips (22 × 22 mm). A 0.1-ml droplet of conidial suspension (5 × 10³ conidia per ml) was deposited in the center of each of four coverslips placed on moistened filter paper in glass petri dishes. Each petri dish was sealed with Parafilm to maintain 100% relative humidity and incubated at 26°C in darkness. Coverslips were sampled at intervals similar to inoculated leaves and prepared for microscopic observation by mounting on slides and staining with a drop of 0.1% aniline blue in lactophenol. Conidial germination and appressorium development were quantified at ×250 magnification as described for leaf disks. Four coverslips were counted for each sampling time, and the experiment was repeated once.
Assessment of host penetration. To confirm microscopic observations of cleared leaf disks that indicated no penetration of the epidermis by hyphae up to 168 hours after inoculation, two alternative assessment methods were used. In the first method, 30 strawberry leaves were collected and placed in humid chambers at 100% relative humidity as described previously. Each leaflet was inoculated with two 0.01-ml droplets of a suspension (1.8 × 10⁴ conidia per ml) on each side of the leaflet midvein. The humid chambers were bagged and incubated at 26°C in darkness for 72 hours. Leaves were arbitrarily sampled from the crispers and assigned to each of six treatments arranged in a 3 × 2 factorial design, including (i) the method of disinfestation (surface disinfested, peeled/disinfested, and untreated), and (ii) the method used to induce senescence (freezing or not freezing leaves for 2 hours after disinfestation). Ten leaves were surface-disinfested for 90 seconds in a mixture of 500 ml of sodium hypochlorite (0.5%) with 20 µl of Tween 20 (25%) and rinsed three times in sterile distilled water. Clear nail polish was applied to the adaxial surface of an additional 10 leaves, air-dried, and peeled off to detach fungal structures from the leaf surface, after which the leaves were surface sterilized and rinsed as described previously. The remaining 10 leaves were used as untreated controls. From each group of 10 leaves, five were placed in sterile paper towels and frozen for 6 hours to induce senescence and sporulation of C. acutatum, whereas the remaining five leaves were not frozen. The two lateral leaflets from each leaf were detached and plated, adaxial side up, onto PDA amended with streptomycin (150 ppm), tetracycline (150 ppm), and Tergitol (18 drops per liter). The plates were sealed with Parafilm and incubated for 5 days at 26°C in darkness. The number of inoculum droplets that yielded C. acutatum colonies on each leaflet was counted 5 days after inoculation. A total of 40 droplets were assessed per treatment (four droplets from five leaves, two leaflets per leaf).
In the second assessment of host penetration, four leaves were each inoculated with two 0.02-ml drops of a 10⁵ conidia per ml suspension of unwashed conidia and incubated in cris
Data analysis. Because most population growth trends reached an apparent asymptote at 48 hours, counts of total conidia, total appressoria, and total appressoria with pores were averaged over a period of 48 to 168 hours to represent the final population size, and the corresponding standard errors of the mean were calculated. Initial population size (primary conidia) was determined by the total number of conidia 3 hours after inoculation.
RESULTS
Germination process. Conidia began to germinate on leaves and coverslips within 3 hours after inoculation. Most conidia developed a central transverse septum and germinated on one or both ends by forming a germination tube or a sessile appressorium. Some conidia, however, did not become septate. Appressoria also developed at the distal ends of the elongated germination tubes, which were sometimes branched. Appressoria were initially hyaline but then became melanized and developed basal pores on both leaves and coverslips. Many sessile appressoria did not become melanized but instead formed a germination tube at the tip, where another appressorium developed and became melanized. By 48 hours after inoculation, the primary conidia (used to inoculate plants) had begun to collapse and disintegrate, while several hyphal segments and conidial cells had become melanized.
Secondary conidia were produced by primary conidia that germinated with phialides instead of germination tubes and by phialides forming on elongated germination tubes. Conidial phialides were observed on nonseptate primary conidia, as well as on septate primary conidia that had developed a germination tube or appressorium on the opposite end. Secondary conidia were first observed on conidial phialides 9 and 6 hours after inoculation in experiments 1 and 2, respectively, and on hyphal phialides 24 hours after inoculation. Both conidial and hyphal phialides produced multiple secondary conidia that detached and accumulated near the phialides.
Preliminary experiments indicated that a large proportion of conidia were washed off leaf disks immediately (0 hours) after inoculation due to immersion of the disks in fixative. Conidial wash-off was negligible at more than 3 hours after inoculation, as germinated conidia were more firmly attached to the leaves. This artifact explains why the number of ungerminated conidia observed on leaves was lower at 0 hours than at 3 hours after inoculation. Consequently, we used the total number of conidia at 3 hours as an estimate of the number of primary conidia. After the initial increase, the number of ungerminated conidia on leaves decreased to a minimum 9 hours after inoculation, when 88% and 95% germination were observed in experiments 1 and 2, respectively. The increase in the number of ungerminated conidia observed after this time, and the consequent increase in total conidia, resulted from the production of secondary conidia on the leaf surface. No superficial evidence of infection (e.g., tissue discoloration, acervuli) was observed.
In the coverslip experiments, conidia germinated and formed structures similar to those described on leaves. However, fungal behavior was more variable between sampling times and between the two experiments. Germination began within 3 hours after inoculation in experiment 1 but occurred between 9 and 12 hours after inoculation in experiment 2.
Appressorium development. In both leaf experiments, the number of initially unmelanized appressoria on leaf surfaces decreased beginning 6 hours after inoculation as melanization occurred. Appressorial pores were first observed at approximately the same time that melanization began. The number of appressoria with pores increased over time, and most had pores after 18 and 36 hours in experiments 1 and 2, respectively. Between 48 and 168 hours after inoculation, an average of 60% of the total appressoria on leaves developed appressorial pores. On coverslips, appressoria became melanized and formed pores, but a higher number of appressoria remained unmelanized relative to the total appressoria than on leaves.
Host penetration. The presence of intra- or intercellular infection structures on cleared leaf disks was not detected. In the surface disinfestation experiments, unfrozen leaves remained green throughout the experiment, except for some localized browning on leaves from the surface-disinfested or peeled/disinfested treatments, perhaps in response to wounding. All frozen leaves were uniformly brown, a result of senescence induced by freezing. On unfrozen leaves, 0, 4, and 4 of 40 inoculum droplets yielded C. acutatum colonies in the untreated, surface-disinfested, and peeled/disinfested treatments, respectively. Colonies of C. acutatum, consisting of bright orange acervular masses, developed only where tissue browning coincided with inoculated sites, but never on green leaf areas. On frozen leaves, 40, 13, and 0 of 40 inoculum droplets yielded C. acutatum colonies in the untreated, surface-disinfested, and peeled/disinfested treatments, respectively. Host penetration was not detected in microscopic observations of more than 300 appressoria on transverse leaf sections.
DISCUSSION. This is the first report of the production of secondary conidia by C. acutatum on symptomless strawberry leaves. Secondary conidiation, also known as microcyclic or precocious conidiation, is defined as conidiation that occurs directly after conidial germination with little or no mycelial growth. This phenomenon has been reported for several fungi, including other Colletotrichum spp., but its occurrence in C. acutatum was previously described only in vitro and on other hosts.
We observed secondary conidiation on both leaves and coverslips, indicating that this phenomenon can occur in the absence of host penetration or other nutrient sources. The production of secondary conidia increased the total number of conidia on leaf and coverslip surfaces. The actual number of secondary conidia produced per unit of primary inoculum applied may have been underestimated due to wash-off of secondary conidia. Although secondary conidiation was responsible for up to a threefold increase in the total number of conidia on leaf and coverslip surfaces, up to fivefold increases were observed in preliminary experiments using unwashed conidia.
Secondary conidiation in other fungi has been associated with factors that inhibit hyphal development, such as nutrient deficiency and high-temperature stress. Furthermore, it has been shown that the presence of germination inhibitors associated with masses of conidia of Glomerella cingulata stimulated the production of secondary conidia by this fungus. Our observations are consistent with this work because conidial washing may have diluted germination inhibitors and thereby suppressed secondar
Previous work has suggested that foliage may be a significant source of inoculum for fruit and flower infections by other Colletotrichum spp. on several hosts. On citrus, Zulfiqar et al. showed that appressoria of C. acutatum were induced to germinate and form secondary conidia on leaf surfaces in response to water and flower extracts. These conidia were splash-dispersed on flowers, resulting in postbloom fruit drop. In our study, we observed the collapse of fungal hyphae and primary conidia within 48 hours after inoculation, with only melanized appressoria, melanized hyphal segments, and secondary conidia remaining intact on both leaf and coverslip surfaces. These melanized structures are likely forms of pathogen survival on symptomless leaves. It is also reasonable to hypothesize that, as in citrus, appressoria can be induced to germinate and produce secondary conidia that can function as primary inoculum for strawberry fruit infections.
C. acutatum germinated and formed melanized appressoria with pores, as previously observed for this fungus on strawberry and other hosts. We did not detect host penetration or other evidence of quiescent infections with any of the three methods used for this purpose. The development of appressorial pores on both leaves and coverslips could not be interpreted as evidence for host penetration. Quiescent infections of C. acutatum have been detected on citrus by stripping leaf surfaces with nail polish and observing the development of acervuli on these leaves over time. In our experiments, this method yielded no C. acutatum colonies on leaves that were frozen to enhance acervulus development, suggesting the complete removal of C. acutatum from leaf surfaces and the absence of quiescent infections.
Senescence is required for acervular development on strawberry leaves, indicated by the development of acervuli from all inoculum droplets on frozen, untreated leaves and their absence on green areas of unfrozen leaves. The reduction in the number of C. acutatum colonies on frozen, surface-disinfested leaves compared with frozen, untreated leaves suggests that this method is partially effective in removing fungal structures on the leaves. Development of acervuli on senesced areas of a few unfrozen, peeled leaves may have resulted from incomplete appressorium removal from these leaves. In other work, microscopic observations of strawberry leaf sections detected subcuticular infections of C. acutatum on leaves and petioles. Differences in strawberry cultivars, C. acutatum isolates, and physiological condition of the leaves are possible explanations for differences between our results and these studies.
The results of experiments regarding the production of secondary conidia and the development of appressoria and appressorial pores on lea
Our evidence suggests that C. acutatum inoculum can survive and multiply on symptomless strawberry leaves, and that the production of secondary conidia may increase inoculum when susceptible tissue is not available. Eventually, a greater awareness of the surreptitious fungal dynamics on symptomless plants may also justify changes in currently recommended control strategies. Early fungicide applications, for example, might effectively reduce initial inoculum production on developing plants, thus reducing subsequent epidemic development on fruit.
The appressorial development of Colletotrichum acutatum on strawberry leaves was studied across two experiments. In the first experiment, leaves were spray inoculated with a suspension of 5 × 10^5 conidia per ml, while in the second experiment, similar methods were applied. Additionally, coverslips were inoculated with 0.1-ml droplets of a 5 × 10^3 conidia per ml suspension, and all samples were incubated at 26°C in darkness. Error bars in the data represent ±1 standard error of the mean, calculated from pooled variance among observations (N = 8) at each time point and averaged for all curves.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was funded by the North American Strawberry Growers Association and a Praxis XXI scholarship from the Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia, Portugal. This is Journal Paper J-19053 of the Iowa Agriculture and Home Economics Experiment Station, Ames, Project 3564, supported by Hatch Act and State funds. We thank D. Legard and A. Ureña from the University of Florida GCREC-Dover, and B. Smith from USDA-ARS, Poplarville, MS, for the identification of our isolate, as well as the Iowa State University Bessey Microscopy Facility for the SEM pictures.
LITERATURE CITED
Florida. Plant Dis. 76:976-981. Leandro, L. F. S., Gleason, M. L., and Nutter, F. W., Jr. 1999. Production of secondary spores by Colletotrichum acutatum on strawberry leaves in the absence of infection. (Abstr.) Phytopathology 89(suppl.)
. Lee, D. 1993. Effect of temperature on the conidium germination and appressorium formation of Colletotrichum acutatum, C. dematium, and C. gloeosporoides. Korean J. Mycol. 21:224-229. Legard, D. E. 2000. Colletotrichum diseases of strawberry in Florida. Pages 292-299 in: Colletotrichum: Host Specificity, Pathology, and Host-Pathogen Interaction. D. Prusky, S. Freeman, and M. B. Dickman, eds. The American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. Lingappa, B. T., and Lingappa, Y. 1969. Role of auto-inhibitors on mycelial growth and dimorphism of Glomerella cingulata. J. Gen. Microbiol. 56:35-45. Maas, J. L., and Palm, M. E. 1997. Occurrence of anthracnose irregular leaf spot, caused by Colletotrichum acutatum, on strawberry in Maryland. Adv. Strawberry Res. 16:68-70. Mangenot, F., and Reisinger, O. 1976. Form and function of conidia as related to their development. Pages 789-847 in: The Fungal Spore: Form and Function. D. J. Weber and W. H. Hess, eds. Wiley-Interscience, New York. McInnes, T. B., Black, L. L., and Gatti, J. M., Jr. 1992. Disease-free plants for management of strawberry anthracnose crown rot. Plant Dis. 76:260-264. Mertely, J. C., and Legard, D. E. 2000. A freezing technique to detect latent infections of Colletotrichum spp. on strawberry. (Abstr.) Phytopathology 90(suppl.)
. Nair, J., and Corbin, J. B. 1981. Histopathology of Pinus radiata seedlings infected by Colletotrichum acutatum f. sp. pinea. Phytopathology 71:777-783. Pantidou, M. E., and Schroeder, W. T. 1955. Foliage as a source of secondary inoculum for tomato anthracnose. Phytopathology 45:338-345. Parbery, D
