Strawberry Anthracnose: Histopathology of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. fragariae
Kenneth J. Curry, Maritza Abril, Jana B. Avant, and Barbara J. Smith
University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg 39406; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Small Fruit Research Station, P.O. Box 287, Poplarville, MS 39470.
Accepted for publication 23 May 2002.
ABSTRACT
Curry, K. J., Abril, M., Avant, J. B., and Smith, B. J. 2002. Strawberry anthracnose: Histopathology of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. fragariae. Phytopathology 92:1055-1063.
The ontogeny of the invasion process by Colletotrichum acutatum and C. fragariae was studied on petioles and stolons of the strawberry cultivar Chandler using light and electron microscopy. The invasion of host tissue by each fungal species was similar; however, each invasion event occurred more rapidly with C. fragariae than with C. acutatum. Following cuticular penetration via an appressorium, subsequent steps of invasion involved hyphal growth within the cuticle and within the cell walls of epidermal, subepidermal, and subtending cells. Both species of fungi began invasion with a brief biotrophic phase before entering an extended necrotrophic phase. Acervuli formed once the cortical tissue had been moderately disrupted, beginning with the development of a stroma just beneath the outer periclinal epidermal walls. Acervuli erupted through the cuticle and released conidia. Invasion of the vascular tissue typically occurred after acervulus maturation and remained minimal. Chitin distribution in walls of C. fragariae was visualized with gold-labeled wheat germ agglutinin. The outer layer of bilayered walls of conidia, germ tubes, and appressoria contained less chitin than unilayered hyphae in planta. Additional keywords: colloidal gold, hemibiotrophy, host–pathogen interactions, lectin, ultrastructure.
Anthracnose diseases of strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa Duch.) are caused by the fungal pathogens Colletotrichum acutatum Simmonds, C. fragariae Brooks, and C. gloeosporioides (Penz.) Penz. & Sacc. (teleomorph Glomerella cingulata (Stonem.) Spauld. & Schrenk). All three species cause diseases that cannot be distinguished in the field by symptoms alone. Petiole and stolon lesions occur on plants grown worldwide but may go undetected in cool, dry areas where they cause little injury to the plants. C. fragariae is most often associated with anthracnose crown rot of strawberries grown in hot, humid areas such as the southeastern United States. Its host range is limited to strawberries and a few weeds. C. acutatum is the primary causal agent of anthracnose fruit rot and has a broader geog
A large number of light and electron microscopic studies describing plant interactions with Colletotrichum species have been published, but we have not found studies on the ultrastructure of the C. acutatum and C. fragariae–strawberry systems. A consideration of the detailed natures of biotrophy, necrotrophy, and hemibiotrophy is necessary for understanding the invasion mechanisms of C. acutatum and C. fragariae. Biotrophy is the condition in which the fungus maintains its host cells alive while removing nutrients from them. Necrotrophy is the condition in which the fungus approaches living host cells and kills them before entering their lumina. Hemibiotrophy is a condition in which the fungus initially enters a biotrophic phase and then switches to a necrotrophic phase. The initial penetration and invasion processes of a plant host by a fungal pathogen in the absence of a significant plant resistant response ensure successful colonization of host tissue and subsequent necrotrophic activities.
Bailey et al. described two major invasion strategies: intracellular hemibiotrophic invasion and subcuticular intramural invasion. Early stages of invasion for both strategies include conidial adhesion to the host surface, germination of conidia, production of germ tubes, and penetration of the host cuticle via appressoria. Subcuticular intramural pathogens grow within the cuticle and within the cell walls of epidermal, subepidermal, and subtending cells, killing host cells prior to entering them (necrotrophic phase). Intracellular hemibiotrophic pathogens invade living cells for a short time, maintaining them apparently for nutritional advantage, and then convert to a necrotrophic phase. The role of chitin both as a host defense elicitor and as a target for plant chitinases is well documented. Several fungi are known to modify or mask chitin in structures involved in early penetration, presumably to avoid detection by the host or to avoid the effects of host chitinases. A lectin probe, gold-labeled wheat germ agglutinin, was chosen to study the distribution of chitin in the walls of C. fragariae during the initial infection of the strawberry host. The purpose of this study was to document the invasion strategies of C. acutatum and C. fragariae in strawberry with respect to strategies previously described by Bailey et al. and to examine the degree to which chitin was present in various fungal infective structures.
Strawberry plants (cv. Chandler) were planted in 10- × 10-cm plastic pots containing a 1:1 (vol/vol) mixture of Jiffy-Mix and pasteurized sand and grown for at least 6 weeks before inoculation in a greenhouse maintained at 30°C day/18°C night ±6°C with a 16-h photoperiod. Older leaves, runners, and flowers were removed 1 to 7 days before inoculation, leaving three or four young leaves on each plant at inoculation. Isolates of C. acutatum Goff and C. fragariae CF-63 and CF-75 were maintained on silica gel at USDA-ARS in Poplarville, MS. These isolates were grown on potato dextrose agar (PDA) for 14 to 21 days at 25°C under fluorescent light with a 14/10 h light/dark cycle. The cultures were located approximately 18 cm beneath four fluorescent tubes.
Conidial suspensions used for inoculations were prepared by flooding each PDA culture plate with sterile deionized water and gently scraping the agar surface with a glass rod to remove conidia. The resulting conidial suspension was filtered through cheesecloth, and a final conidial suspension of 1.5 × 10^6 conidia per ml was used to inoculate strawberry plants. Attached petioles and stolons were inoculated by misting to the point of runoff or by spot inoculation. Plants were incubated in a sealed 10-gallon tank at 100% relative humidity for 24 hours and then at reduced relative humidity by removing half of the plastic tank cover for the remainder of the incubation time. Plants inoculated with Colletotrichum acutatum were incubated at 28°C; those inoculated with Colletotrichum fragariae were incubated at 32°C. Following inoculation, petioles and stolons were examined microscopically at 8- to 10-hour intervals for 96 hours to document the morphology and time required for germ tube development, appressorial formation, penetration of the epidermis, subsequent invasion of tissue, development of disease symptoms, and acervulus production.
Tissue processing involved fixing symptomatic tissue for 2 hours in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer (pH 7.0), 2.0% formaldehyde, and 2.5% glutaraldehyde. Tissue was rinsed with distilled water and post-fixed for 45 minutes in cacodylate buffered (pH 7.0) 1% osmium tetroxide. It was then dehydrated with an ethanol series (50%, 70%, 85%, 95%, and 100%) followed by propylene oxide. Tissue was infiltrated in a 50/50% by volume ERL 4206 resin (Spurr’s)/propylene oxide for 4 hours on a rotator, followed by a 75/25% by volume resin/propylene oxide change overnight on a rotator. Tissue was infiltrated with two changes of 100% resin during an 8-hour period and cured at 70°C for 24 to 36 hours. ERL 4206 resin contained nonenyl succinic anhydride (26 g), vinyl cyclohexene dioxide (10 g), diglycidyl ether (6 g), and dimethyl aminoethanol (0.2 g). Slides with semithin sections (approximately 1 µm) were placed on a hotplate at 55°C, stained for 1 to 2 minutes with 0.1% aqueous toluidine blue O, and examined with a light microscope. Ultrathin sections (approximately 100 nm) were taken with a Porter-Blum MT-2B microtome and a diamond knife and collected on 200-mesh copper grids.
The results of the inoculation study indicated the time from the inoculat
Grids were stained with lead citrate and 2% aqueous uranyl acetate. Sections were viewed using a Zeiss EM 10-C transmission electron microscope. We developed a procedure to aid in locating appressoria on fixed, embedded material. Slivers of epidermal tissue, on which appressoria had been seen with a compound microscope, were flat-embedded in 2 to 3 mm of resin and cured at 70°C for 20 to 24 hours. Appressoria on the host tissue were identified through the thin plastic with a compound microscope, and hand sections containing appressoria were obtained. Those hand sections were then remounted with Duco cement on prefaced stubs created by curing Spurr’s plastic in polyethylene capsules.
Light micrographs taken 72 hours after inoculation with Colletotrichum spp. show various stages of invasion. The first image displays a petiole inoculated with C. acutatum, with a scale bar of 50 µm. Subsequent images depict a stolon inoculated with C. fragariae, with a scale bar of 25 µm. The advanced stage of invasion reveals a disrupted cortex and a mature acervulus on the intact epidermal and subepidermal layers, while the vascular tissue (phloem and xylem) remains intact. Hyphae are shown invading parenchyma cells and vessel members. Additionally, the host cuticle expands as the acervulus enlarges, with the mature acervulus and stroma occupying the epidermal and subepidermal host layers, while the cortex experiences massive destruction.
An electron micrograph of an appressorium of Colletotrichum fragariae shows it separated from an adjacent fungal cell by a matrix. The probe labeled the inner walls, not the outer walls or matrix. The basal pore is located on the basal portion of the appressorium and is delimited by a membrane. Another electron micrograph illustrates a germinated conidium of C. fragariae, where the gold probe labels chitin on the inner wall and the septum, but is absent from the outer wall and the matrix.
The application of the wheat germ agglutinin lectin probe for chitin was modified from Benhamou. The ultrathin sections on 200-mesh nickel grids were floated on a drop of phosphate buffered saline in a moist chamber for 1 hour. Grids were subsequently incubated for 2 hours in a moist chamber with a lectin-gold complex. Each grid was then washed and air dried before staining with lead citrate and uranyl acetate. Controls involved four-day-old cultures of C. fragariae, which were overlaid by a thin layer of agar to hold the mycelium together, cut into plugs, fixed, and processed for ultrathin sectioning
The specificity of the WGA lectin binding was determined by the following tests used by Benhamou. These controls were run simultaneously with the application of the normal probe on symptomatic tissue. (1) The gold-labeled lectin was first pre-adsorbed with poly-(1-4)-β-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine purified from crab shells at a concentration of 1 mg per 2 ml of probe for 1 hour and then applied to sections containing fungi from a strawberry petiole lesion 1 mm or larger. (2) The ultrathin sections were floated on a drop of PBS for 1 hour and probed with wheat germ agglutinin without a gold label for 1 hour. The remainder of the probe application was as described above.
RESULTS
Light microscopy. The ontogeny of the infection processes of Colletotrichum acutatum and Colletotrichum fragariae on inoculated plants was similar at the light or electron microscopic levels. Lesions most commonly developed on stolon tips and the upper portion of the youngest petiole with fully expanded leaflets. Lesions were first observed 2 days after inoculation as lenticular brown spots that developed into dark, sunken, leathery lesions typical of anthracnose, eventually girdling the stolon or petiole. Spore germination began as early as 16 hours after inoculation, with the germ tubes originating from either end of a conidium and occasionally from both ends. Germ tubes generally spanned one plant cell length or less but occasionally grew across several cells. Appressorial formation began as early as 20 hours after inoculation. Development of an appressorium started as a swelling of the germ tube tip, and appressorial development could occur on such a short germ tube that it appeared sessile. Appressoria were initially unmelanized but by 24 hours they were fully pigmented. Small circular areas on the basal sides of appressoria, seen by focusing through an appressorium with the light microscope, were interpreted to be pores from which the penetration pegs developed. The typical mature appressorium for either species was globose and approximately 3 to 5 µm in diameter. Appressoria frequently developed over anticlinal host walls, but occasionally were found over periclinal walls or near stomata. Appressoria and their basal pores were found on the surface of both healthy and diseased plant tissue. The first signs of host cell distress appeared when the cell wall contour became distorted, and the plasmalemma pulled away from the cell wall. Hyphae during early stages of lesion formation were less abundant in epidermal and subepidermal cells than in cortical cells. A gradual increase of fungal hyphae in the host cuticle, epidermis, and subepidermis was observed, with hyphae restricted to the apoplast in early stages of
Fig. 6. Electron micrographs showing later stages of invasion. A, Stolon 72 hours after inoculation with Colletotrichum fragariae. B, Petiole 116 hours after inoculation with C. acutatum. A and B demonstrate the penetration of dead host cells. Some host cells were characterized by electron-dense osmiophilic material associated with the tonoplast (A), while others were not (B). C and D illustrate the early development of a stroma in stolon 116 hours after inoculation with C. fragariae. C shows a hypha (h) growing from the subepidermis to the epidermal layer. D presents initial stromatic fungal cells located between the cuticle and the host wall of the epidermal layer. Notable features include the increasing degree of vacuolation (v) of fungal cells, disruption of the tonoplast, and the presence of abundant osmiophilic material. c = cuticle; e = epidermal layer; f = fungal cell; hw = host wall; o = osmiophilic material; arrow = tonoplast. Bar = 2 µm.
Formation occurred concurrently. The fungus was seen in vessel elements during this last phase of the invasion process. Acervulus formation began with the development of a stroma within the cuticle of epidermal cells. The cuticle expanded considerably to accommodate the growing acervulus. The maturing acervulus broke through the cuticle and eventually produced conidia. The acervulus expanded radially with the stroma also extending from the epidermis to the subepidermis. Acervuli were produced over a disrupted cortex or, in extreme cases, over a completely disintegrated cortex. In either case, the epidermal and some subepidermal tissue remained intact. The invasion of host tissue by C. fragariae and C. acutatum was similar; however, each invasion event occurred more rapidly with C. fragariae than with C. acutatum. Lesions were visible on petioles 3 days after inoculation with C. fragariae, but were not visible until 4 days after inoculation with C. acutatum. A similar delay in invasion events was observed between petiole and stolon tissues following inoculation of either species. Most events were observed a day sooner on the stolons than on the petioles within species.
Electron microscopy revealed that the conidial and germ tube walls comprised two layers, with the outer layer being thinner and more electron-dense than the inner layer. Only the inner conidial layer was labeled by the WGA probe. Upon germination, a septum was laid
Some hyphae invaded the cuticle, outer epidermal wall, and anticlinal walls of the epidermis. Some hyphae initially penetrated what appeared to be living host cells. The host plasmalemma invaginated to accommodate hyphal penetration. The interface of the host membrane and hyphal wall was frequently associated with a particular arrangement of electron-dense material. Several degrees of disturbance and relaxation of the microfibrillar components of cell walls were observed during the penetration of host cells, including early penetration events. The death of fungal cells was a rare occurrence. Several dying host cells exhibited an amorphous, osmiophilic material around the inside portion of the tonoplast; others did not. Some cortical fungal hyphae appeared to be growing back to the epidermis in the stage prior to acervulus formation. Acervulus formation involved the development of a subcuticular stroma within and beneath the outer host epidermal cell walls. A gradual vacuolation developed in stromatic cells. The stroma continued to develop into the epidermal and adjacent subepidermal cells, finally rupturing the cuticle. Late development of the acervulus included the extension of the host cuticle to accommodate the expanding stroma, the rupture of the cuticle, and early development of conidia. C. acutatum and C. fragariae had a pulvinate type of acervulus.
There were no apparent variations in the labeling of walls of fungi grown on PDA when compared to both young and older hyphae from lesions in planta. The WGA probe was evenly distributed on the unilayered walls. Septa were labeled with the same intensity as the outer walls. Labeling was diminished as expected when the probe was preadsorbed with chitin. Labeling was also diminished when the sections were incubated with lectin before applying the lectin-gold complex.
C. acutatum and C. fragariae underwent a very brief biotrophic phase (less than 12 hours) before entering their extended necrotrophic phase. Representatives of both species of fungi were observed entering living host cells and developing a matrix comparable to that described in reported biotrophic systems, but they killed the host cells within a few hours. Previous descriptions for other Colletotrichum species cite biotrophy at a minimum of “less than 24 hours.” However, a situation in which a living cell is entered and quickly killed might be considered a modification of necrotrophy, rather than biotrophy or hemibiotrophy. Both intracellular hemibiotrophic and subcuticular intramural interactions were observed.
Colletotrichum species avoid triggering resistance responses during the symptomless phase. Species with an intracellular hemibiotrophic strategy require an intimate cytoplasmic interaction between the plant and the pathogen, while species with a subcuticular intramural strategy do not require such intimacy. Since the former species have a restricted host range, they are considered specialists, while the latter species are considered generalists. Regardless of the length of the biotrophic phase, all species eventually revert to necrotrophic development. Since C. acutatum is a generalist invader, only necrotrophic development was predicted, while C. fragariae is a specialist invader for which an extended biotrophic phase was predicted to precede the necrotrophic phase. The brevity of the biotrophic phase in C. acutatum and C. fragariae leaves some uncertainty about calling these fungi hemibiotrophs and comparing their initial infection strategies in terms of previously described species.
Penetration pegs were observed in our studies at the light microscope level but not at the ultrastructural level. Appressoria of C. fragariae observed at the ultrastructural level may have been in the process of forming a penetration peg or may have been arrested just prior to the formation of a penetration peg. Latent or quiescent stages have been observed in fungal infections of fruits, where the mature appressorium often will not produce a peg until the fruit is at a particular stage of ripeness. This concept has not been sufficiently studied in strawberries for the fungal penetration of stolons, petioles, leaves, or roots. Strawberry petioles are often more resistant to infection by C. fragariae while the plant is in fruit. Development of appressoria of some species ceases under the onset of unfavorable conditions, remains latent, and resumes when the conditions are again favorable. The more rapid invasion of host tissue by C. fragariae than by C. acutatum is in agreement with previous reports that C. fragariae is more aggressive than C. acutatum in inciting disease symptoms following inoculation.
The distribution of chitin visualized by a WGA gold probe in C. lindemuthianum has been reported. We found several similarities as well as some differences between their findings and our results using the same probe to study C. fragariae. The outer appressorial wall layer of C. lindemuthianum was labeled more heavily by the probe than the inner layer. By contrast, the outer appressorial wall layer of C. fragariae was labeled less heavily by the probe than the inner layer. The matrices of both C. lindemuthianum and C. fragariae were unlabeled. The young intracellular hyphae of C. lindemuthianum were unlabeled, but the invasive hyphal walls of C. fragariae and walls of the comparable secondary hyphae of C. lindemuthianum were labeled. The actively growing hyphal tips of either species labeled with less intensity than the mature walls. The outer wall layers of preinvasive structures of C. fragariae did not show a chitin-gold complex, but the single wall layers of invasive hyphae from the earliest stages observed in planta contain chitin distribution comparable to young hyphae observed in vitro. C. fragariae did not appear to modify its chitin distribution during its very brief biotrophic phase as C. lindemuthianum does. This supports the suggestion that chitin masking is necessary during initial contact to establish a biotrophic relationship.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: We gratefully acknowledge funding for this research from the North American Strawberry Growers Association; the Mississippi Association of Plant Pathologists and Nematologists for
Sure! Please provide the contents from the article, and I'll revise them as you requested.
American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. Smith, B. J. 1998. Anthracnose leaf spot and irregular leaf spot. Pages 46-48 in: Compendium of Strawberry Diseases. 2nd ed. J. L. Maas, ed. The American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. Smith, B. J. 2002. Susceptibility of vegetative tissues of fruit and vegetable hosts to infection by various Colletotrichum species. Acta Hortic. 567:631-634. Smith, B. J., and Black, L. L. 1987. Resistance of strawberry plants to Colletotrichum fragariae affected by environmental conditions. Plant Dis. 71:834-837. Smith, B. J., and Black, L. L. 1990. Morphological, cultural, and pathogenic variation among Colletotrichum species isolated from strawberry. Plant Dis. 74:69-76. Sutton, B. C. 1966. The appressoria of Colletotrichum graminicola and Colletotrichum falcatum. Can. J. Bot. 44:887-897. Walker, J. C. 1921. Onion smudge. J. Agric. Res. 20:685-721. Wharton, P. S., Julian, A. M., and O’Connell, R. J. 2001. Ultrastructure of the infection of Sorghum bicolor by Colletotrichum sublineolum. Phytopathology 91:149-158. Whiteside, J. O. 1998. Symptomless and quiescent infections by fungi. Page 30 in: Compendium of Citrus Diseases. 1st ed. J. O. Whiteside, S. M. Garnsey, and L. W. Timmers, eds. The American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN.
