Identification of Colletotrichum Species Responsible for Anthracnose and Root Necrosis of Strawberry in Israel
ABSTRACT
Freeman, S., and Katan, T. 1997. Identification of Colletotrichum species responsible for anthracnose and root necrosis of strawberry in Israel. Phytopathology 87:516-521. Strawberry anthracnose was observed for the first time in Israel in 1995. The disease reached epidemic proportions in Israeli nurseries and production fields during 1995 and 1996. Using morphological and cultural characteristics, the species responsible for anthracnose was identified as Colletotrichum acutatum. A reliable semi-selective medium, amended with iprodione and lactic acid, was used to isolate the fungus from infected tissues. Additionally, C. acutatum was subsequently isolated from necrotic roots of stunted, chlorotic plants that exhibited no symptoms of anthracnose. High levels of the pathogen were quantified from naturally infested field soil and perlite growth substrate in the rhizosphere of diseased plants on the iprodione-amended medium. Both foliar- and root-infecting isolates were equally pathogenic to strawberry, causing 95 to 100% plant mortality when inoculated on roots and foliage. In complementation (heterokaryon) tests using nitrate nonutilizing mutants, 113 out of 115 isolates from different plant parts and locations belonged to a single vegetative compatibility group. Arbitrarily primed polymerase chain reaction of genomic DNA using four repetitive-motif primers produced nearly uniform amplified DNA banding patterns for 141 of the Israeli strawberry isolates from various sites, plots, plant tissues, and cultivars. When compared to reference isolates from the US, these band patterns suggested that a single introduction of C. acutatum was responsible for strawberry anthracnose on foliage and necrosis of roots in Israel.
Additional keywords: Colletotrichum fragariae, C. gloeosporioides, Fragaria × ananassa. Several species of the fungal plant pathogen Colletotrichum cause strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa Duch.) anthracnose, a major disease of this crop. Principal pathogens known to be responsible for the disease include C. acutatum J.H. Simmonds, C. fragariae Brooks, and C. gloeosporioides (Penz.) Penz. & Sacc. in Penz. (teleomorph Glomerella cingulata (Stoneman) Spauld. & H. Schrenk). Infections of mother plants with C. acutatum lead to bud and eventually crown rot, resulting in the collapse and death of the plant. In nurser
From May to September 1995, a severe outbreak of strawberry anthracnose was observed in several strawberry-growing nurseries in Israel. Following transplantation to production fields during September and October, entire beds of strawberry plants collapsed. Typical anthracnose symptoms observed from November 1995 to June 1996 included crown rot, flower blight, and green and ripe fruit rot. This was the first record of strawberry anthracnose in Israel. Moreover, in at least four production fields in the same region, hundreds of plants developed symptoms of stunting and chlorosis, which are atypical of strawberry anthracnose. When these plants were uprooted, most of their roots were dark brown and decayed. Colletotrichum was readily isolated from necrotic root tissues, although no foliar anthracnose was observed.
Traditional methods for discriminating between species of Colletotrichum have relied primarily on morphology, such as the size and shape of the conidia, colony color, presence or absence of setae, and the existence of the teleomorph, G. cingulata. However, due to environmental influences on the stability of morphological traits and the existence of intermediate forms, these criteria are not always adequate for the reliable differentiation of the Colletotrichum species responsible for strawberry anthracnose. Recently, various molecular techniques have been used to accurately identify the three main species causing strawberry anthracnose. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR), utilizing primers of repeat motifs, is a rapid and reliable molecular method for differentiating between the Colletotrichum complex. Studies of vegetative compatibility offer another approach to determining genetic relatedness in anamorphic populations of plant pathogens such as Fusarium oxysporum and Colletotrichum species. Since the exchange of genetic material requires hyphal anastomosis, vegetatively compatible isolates are expected to be more similar to one another, thereby constituting a distinct genetic population.
Strawberry anthracnose reached epidemic proportions in Israel during the 1995 to 1996 and the current 1996 to 1997 growing seasons. At the same time, plants exhibiting stunting, chlorosis, and root necrosis were observed in many production fields. The main purpose of this work was to characterize the species of Colletotrichum responsible for these symptoms and, more specifically, to determine whether anthracnose and root necrosis diseases are incited by the same pathogen or different species. We characterized 147 isolates of Colletotrichum from typical diseased plants as well as atypical stunted, chlorotic plants with root necrosis. Vegetative compatibility tests with nitrate nonutilizing mutants were used to
Cgl-1 and CG-272-1 of genotype Cgl-2 were previously identified and characterized. All Israeli cultures were isolated from symptomatic, infected strawberry plants (fruit, vegetative parts, and roots) from different cultivars, sites, and plots during the 1995 to 1996 season. Infected plant parts were surface-disinfested using 3% sodium hypochlorite and plated on modified Mathur’s medium (MS), which contained 0.1% yeast extract, 0.1% bactopeptone, 1% sucrose, 0.25% MgSO4·7H2O, 0.27% KH2PO4, and 2% agar, supplemented with 2.5 µg (a.i.) of iprodione per ml and acidified with 0.1% lactic acid to suppress the growth of fungal contaminants and bacteria. Cultures were grown on MS at 25°C in the dark and characterized morphologically. They were also transferred to potato dextrose agar (PDA) to verify identification.
In January 1996, four months after transplanting, field soil from three commercial fields in the Sharon region and perlite growth substrate from a breeding plot at the Volcani Center were collected from the rhizosphere of naturally infected plants showing symptoms of stunting and chlorosis. Soil and perlite samples (5 g each, replicated five times) were agitated in 45 ml of sterile distilled water for 30 minutes and dilution plated on supplemented MS to determine the number of colony-forming units (CFU) per gram of soil. Eighty diseased plants (twenty each from the three fields and twenty from the perlite substrate) were assessed for the presence of the pathogen in their roots. Five necrotic root segments, each 1.5 cm long and chosen at random from each plant, were surface-disinfested and plated on supplemented MS.
The study involved various isolates of Colletotrichum acutatum, C. fragariae, and C. gloeosporioides from strawberry plants. The isolates originated from different sites, plots, cultivars, and infected tissues. Each isolate was tested for pathogenicity and molecular characteristics. The origin, site, plot, and cultivar for each isolate were documented, alongside results from molecular analyses and vegetative compatibility groupings. This comprehensive evaluation contributes to understanding the diversity and impact of these pathogens on strawberry crops.
Additional isolate: TUT-TIR4. Additional isolates: TUT-6AB, -9A, -10A, -11A, -12A, -13A, -14A, and -15A. Additional isolates: TUT-16A, -17A, -18A, -19A, -20A, -21A, and -23A. Additional isolate: TUT-25A. Additional isolates: TUT-26A, -27A, -28A, -29A, -30A, -31A, -32A, -33A, -34A, -35A, -36A, -37A, -38A, -39A, -41A, -42A, -43A, -44A, -45A, -46A, -47A, -48A, -49A, -50A, -51A, -52A, -53A, -54A, -55A, -56A, -57A, and -58A. Additional isolates: TUT-59A, -60A, and -61A. Additional isolates: TUT-63A, -64A, -65A, -66A, -67A, -68A, -69A, -70A, -71A, -72A, -73A, -75A, -76A, and -77A. Additional isolates: TUT-78A, -79A, -81A, -82A, -83A, -84A, -85A, -86A, and -87A. Additional isolates: TUT-89A, -90A, -91A, -92A, -94A, -95A, -96A, -97A, -98A, and -99A. Additional isolates: TUT-101A, -102A, -103A, -104A, -105A, -122A, -123A, and -124A. Additional isolates: TUT-107A, -108A, and -109A. Additional isolates: TUT-111A and -112A. Additional isolates: TUT-113A, -114A, -115A, -116A, -117A, -118A, -119A, and -120A. Additional isolates: TUT-125A, -126A, -128A, and -129A. Additional isolates: TUT-131A, -132A, -133A, and -134A. Additional isolates: TUT-135A, -136A, -138A, and -139A. Additional isolates: TUT-141A, -142A, -143A, and -144A.
The experiment involved assessing the pathogenicity of various isolates on strawberry plants. Six-week-old, certified disease-free strawberry plants of the Chandler and Sharon cultivars were used for foliar and root inoculation experiments. For foliar inoculation, plants were sprayed with conidial suspensions of different isolates and maintained in a greenhouse at 25°C under natural daylight. The percentage of plant mortality was evaluated after 7 to 10 days and again after 30 days. For root inoculation, plants were dipped in conidial suspensions for varying durations before being potted in a peat/tuff medium. The percentage of infected roots was calculated, and the experiment was co
Vegetative compatibility grouping. Puhalla’s minimal nitrate agar (MM), a sucrose-salt medium containing nitrate as the nitrogen source, was used to recognize nit mutants and for complementation (heterokaryon) tests. Chlorate media, based on MM or PDA amended with KClO3 (15 or 25 g/liter, respectively), were used to generate nit mutants. Plates (9 cm diameter) of chlorate media were centrally inoculated with small mycelial plugs and incubated at 24 to 27°C. Fast-growing sectors emerging from the restricted colonies were transferred to MM plates (5 cm diameter) and examined after a 4-day incubation period. Colonies with a thin expanding mycelium were considered nit mutants. Partial phenotype characterization of nit mutants was attempted using nitrite, hypoxanthine, and ammonium media. Complementation between nit mutants was tested on MM as described. Heterokaryons were usually evident within 10 to 15 days. When mutants of two different isolates formed a heterokaryon, their parent isolates were assigned to the same vegetative compatibility group (VCG).
Isolation and purification of fungal DNA. Liquid cultures comprising 100 ml of MS in 250-ml Erlenmeyer flasks were inoculated with five mycelial disks derived from colony margins. The cultures were agitated for 5 to 6 days on a rotary shaker (150 rpm, 25°C) and fragmented 12 hours before harvesting the mycelia by blending for 10 seconds at 24,000 rpm with a tissue homogenizer to stimulate new growth. Mycelia were collected by vacuum filtration and lyophilized until dry. DNA was extracted and purified as previously described. The DNA was dissolved in 0.5 ml of TE buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA; pH 8.0) to an approximate concentration of 200 to 500 µg/ml and diluted to a concentration of 10 to 100 ng/ml for PCR.
PCR amplification. For arbitrarily primed PCR (ap-PCR), primers were derived from microsatellite or repeat sequences as follows: CAGCAGCAGCAGCAG, TGTCTGTCTGTCTGTC, GACACGACACGACAC, GACAGACAGACAGACA. In the text, these primers appear as (CAG)5, (TGTC)4, (GACAC)3, and (GACA)4, respectively. PCR reactions were performed in a total volume of 20 µl, containing 10 to 100 ng genomic DNA, 50 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 0.2 mM each of dATP, dCTP, dGTP, and dTTP, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 unit of Taq DNA polymerase, and 1 µM primer. The reactions were incubated in a Hybaid thermocycler, beginning with 5 minutes of denaturation at 95°C, followed by 30 cycles consisting of 30 seconds at 95°C, 30 seconds at either 60°C [for (CAG)5] or 48°C [for (GACA)4, (GACAC)3, and (TGTC)4], and 1.5 minutes at 72°C. Amplification products were separated in agarose gels (1.5%, 15 × 10 cm) in Tris-acetate-EDTA buffer by electrophoresis at 80 V for 2 hours. Ap-PCR experiments were conducted at least three t
Fig. 1. A, Strawberry plant (cv. Oso Grande) with a healthy crown and root system (left). An anthracnose-infected plant (cv. Oso Grande), caused by Colletotrichum acutatum, shows symptoms of wilting, bud and crown rot denoted by arrows, with a healthy root system (middle). A stunted, chlorotic plant exhibits atypical root necrosis with brown discoloration caused by C. acutatum (right). B, Crowns of plants with decayed root systems appear to remain healthy (longitudinal sections denoted by arrows).
Colletotrichum was readily recovered from roots plated on supplemented MS. When roots were plated on nonsupplemented MS, contaminating Alternaria spp. often suppressed Colletotrichum growth. Healthy plants did not yield C. acutatum growth from roots compared to the presence of contaminating Alternaria spp. All isolates from different parts of diseased strawberry plants (roots, vegetative parts, and fruits) produced masses of salmon-orange acute conidia (average size 15 × 4 µm) in dense white mycelium. This morphology is typical of C. acutatum grown on supplemented MS or PDA.
Quantification of C. acutatum in roots and the rhizosphere was assessed for diseased plants growing in soil or perlite growth substrate, which were stunted, chlorotic, and had decayed and necrotic root systems, by plating on supplemented MS. Root segments of all tested plants yielded colonies of C. acutatum. The percentage of root infections was 56 ± 8 and 60 ± 12 for field and perlite-grown plants, respectively. However, the level of C. acutatum in the rhizosphere of plants in perlite growth substrate was approximately 2.5 times higher than that in field soil (18,750 ± 3,375 and 7,600 ± 2,150 CFU/g, respectively).
Four C. acutatum isolates from fruits and roots were used to inoculate the foliage and roots of strawberry plants to determine whether symptom development could be affected by the source of the isolate. The tested isolates, regardless of whether they originated from roots or fruits, caused typical anthracnose symptoms on petioles, leaves, and stolons of both cvs. Chandler and Sharon 7 to 10 days after inoculation. After 30 days, 100% mortality of all foliar-inoculated plants was observed, compared to 0% for the water control plants, which remained healthy thereafter. The effects of isolate origin and duration of root dipping on plant mortality were examined with cvs. Chandler and Sharon. A mortality rate of 90 to 100% was recorded in both cultivars after dipping roots for various periods (10 min, 4 h, or 18 h) in conidial suspensions of isolates originating from roots and fruits. Surviving plants exhibited symptoms of stunting and chlorosis. Root segments from the necrotic tissue of the killed plants, plated on supplemented MS, were 100% infected with C. acutatum. Extended, continuous dipping
Three isolates of this group (TUT-5954, TUT-232:1, and TUT-232:2) were obtained from plant clinics, and seven were sourced from stolons (TUT-8V, TUT-9A, TUT-73A, and TUT-75A) or crown tissue (TUT-6AB, TUT-7E, and TUT-22A) of diseased plants from two locations. A total of 112 nit mutants were obtained from these isolates. Attempts to phenotype the mutants by growing them on media containing nitrate, nitrite, hypoxanthine, or ammonium as the nitrogen source were unsuccessful; their growth on both nitrite and hypoxanthine was erratic, and differences, if any, were uncertain. The mutants of each isolate were first paired among themselves to determine complementation within isolates, and 16 representative mutants were then paired in all possible inter-isolate combinations. All mutants formed stable complementary heterokaryons with at least some of the other mutants, and the pattern of heterokaryon formation indicated that all 10 isolates belonged to a single vegetative compatibility group (VCG). Nit mutants were generated from an additional 105 isolates and paired with representative complementary mutants of the first group. Formation of complementary heterokaryons indicated that 103 of these isolates belonged to the VCG defined by the first group, whereas isolates TUT-111A and TUT-742D were heterokaryon self-incompatible. A total of 39 randomly chosen mutants were divided into seven complementation groups comprised of 1, 1, 3, 3, 4, 7, and 20 mutants. The largest group probably consists of nit1 mutants, whereas the others include one group of nit3 and five groups of NitM mutants. Results of approximately 700 pairings between 16 mutants representing the seven complementation groups and random nit mutants from the 113 vegetatively compatible isolates of this study are summarized. Complementary heterokaryons were obtained in half of the pairings with group A mutants and in all pairings with groups F and G mutants, whereas 86 to 99% of the pairings with mutants of groups B through E resulted in complementation. Consequently, any pair of mutants from different complementation groups B through G could serve as useful and dependable representatives of the local population of Colletotrichum acutatum from strawberry in vegetative compatibility tests.
Israeli isolates were categorized according to site, plot, cultivar, and strawberry-tissue origins. Genomic DNA of 121 Israeli isolates from crown, fr
The main aim of this research was to identify the species of Colletotrichum responsible for the first outbreak of anthracnose disease in Israel and to determine whether the same or different species incited root necrosis in strawberry nurseries and production fields. In a morphotaxonomic comparison, isolates from aboveground parts of anthracnose-affected plants and from necrotic, decayed roots of stunted chlorotic plants were uniform in appearance and classified as C. acutatum. Isolates from fruits and roots were equally pathogenic in artificial inoculations, suggesting that anthracnose and root necrosis were incited by the same pathogen. Isolates from all plant parts, including roots, were vegetatively compatible with one another, manifesting uniformity of the pathogen population. Likewise, the population was uniform in molecular DNA analyses, and its classification as C. acutatum was confirmed by comparisons with reference cultures of the major strawberry Colletotrichum pathogens.
Abundant anthracnose infestation was evident in many nurseries during the summers of 1995 and 1996. This resulted in massive collapse of transplants in soil-fumigated fields. Plants that died during the first 3 to 4 weeks after transplantation are routinely replaced by new transplants. Moreover, because plants are aligned with the drip-irrigation system, the replacement plants are planted in the same slots previously occupied by those that died, exposing them to the soilborne inoculum. Due to infestation in the nurseries, many farmers replanted infected but symptomless transplants in the same plots without refumigating the soil, thereby increasing inoculum density considerably. This was reflected in the high levels of C. acutatum populations in the rhizosphere of plants growing in naturally infested field soils.
The unusual symptoms of root necrosis caused by C. acutatum may have resulted from root exposure to high inoculum density in the soil and the repeated use of contaminated propagation material. Stunted plants with a decayed root system were not infected by systemic invasion of inoculum originating from the crown. Root necrosis caused by C. acutatum has not been widely reported, although lesion development has been noticed on roots following artificial dip inoculations. Moreover, the pathogen was able to survive for up to 9 months in California soils and to overwinter in fruit located above and below the soil surface in Ohio. Survival studies conducted in Israel have shown that populations of C. acutatum in artificially inoculated fruit buried for various periods in the soil decline
Freeman, unpublished data). Therefore, the prospect of persistent soil contamination by a soilborne inoculum of C. acutatum seems unlikely, especially because soil fumigation is standard practice. Although disease symptoms caused by the three major species, C. fragariae, C. acutatum, and C. gloeosporioides, are similar, it is of paramount importance to identify the causal agent of disease for regulatory and breeding purposes, as well as for the selection of control measures. For example, isolates of C. gloeosporioides are sensitive to benzimidazole fungicides, while isolates of C. acutatum are not. Similarly, the slow-growing orange strains of C. acutatum are more tolerant to benomyl than the fast-growing gray forms of C. gloeosporioides, both of which affect citrus. Molecular tools have been successfully utilized to differentiate between the species of Colletotrichum responsible for strawberry anthracnose. Isolates of C. fragariae, C. acutatum, and C. gloeosporioides infecting strawberry were distinctly different in nuclear and A+T-rich DNA analyses, and arbitrarily primed polymerase chain reaction (ap-PCR). Similarly, sequencing and restriction digest analyses of PCR-amplified rDNA have been used to differentiate between C. acutatum and other Colletotrichum species from strawberry. In populations of C. acutatum and C. fragariae from strawberry, little genomic variation existed within each species using various molecular methods. In contrast, high diversity was observed in populations of C. gloeosporioides from strawberry, which possess the perfect stage. However, C. acutatum isolated from strawberries in Europe were discrete from American strawberry isolates. Likewise, isolates of C. acutatum from other hosts, such as peach and pecan, were discrete from the strawberry pathogen, suggesting that C. acutatum is not a uniform group. The uniformity of C. acutatum strawberry isolates in Israel, as illustrated by population grouping based on vegetative compatibility, suggests that the recent disease outbreak was due to a single introduction of the pathogen to Israel. The uniform ap-PCR profiles further indicate that these isolates belong to an asexually reproducing clonal population of apparent U.S. origin. *C. acutatu
Brooker, N. L., Leslie, J. F., and Dickman, M. B. 1991. Nitrate non-utilizing mutants of Colletotrichum and their use in studies of vegetative compatibility and genetic relatedness. Phytopathology 81:672-677.
Brown, A. E., Sreenivasaprasad, S., and Timmer, L. W. 1996. Molecular characterization of slow-growing orange and Key lime anthracnose strains of Colletotrichum from citrus as C. acutatum. Phytopathology 86:523-527.
Correll, J. C., Guerber, J. C., and Morelock, T. E. 1993. Vegetative compatibility and virulence of the spinach anthracnose pathogen, Colletotrichum dematium. Plant Dis. 77:688-691.
Correll, J. C., Klittich, C. J. R., and Leslie, J. F. 1987. Nitrate non-utilizing mutants of Fusarium oxysporum and their use in vegetative compatibility tests. Phytopathology 77:1640-1646.
Correll, J. C., Rhoads, D. D., and Guerber, J. C. 1993. Taxonomic, mtDNA haplotype, VCG, and morphological diversity of Colletotrichum spp. causing fruit-rot of apples. (Abstr.) Phytopathology 83:1412-1413.
Denoyes-Rothan, B., and Guerin, G. 1996. Comparison of six inoculation techniques with Colletotrichum acutatum on cold-stored strawberry plants and screening for resistance to this fungus in French strawberry collections. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 102:615-621.
Eastburn, D. M., and Gubler, W. D. 1990. Strawberry anthracnose: Detection and survival of Colletotrichum acutatum in soil. Plant Dis. 74:161-163.
Elias, K. S., Zamir, D., Lichtman-Pleban, T., and Katan, T. 1993. Population structure of Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. lycopersici: Restriction fragment length polymorphisms provide genetic evidence that vegetative compatibility group is an indicator of evolutionary origin. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 6:565-572.
Freeman, S. 1996. Occurrence and identification of Colletotrichum acutatum responsible for strawberry anthracnose in Israel. (Abstr.) Phytoparasitica
Katan, T., Zamir, D., Sarfatti, M., and Katan, J. 1991. Vegetative compatibility groups and subgroups in Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. radicis-lycopersici. Phytopathology 81:255-262.
Leslie, J. F. 1993. Fungal vegetative compatibility. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 31:127-150.
Liyanage, H. D., McMillan, R. T., Jr., and Kistler, H. C. 1992. Two genetically distinct populations of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides from citrus. Phytopathology 82:1371-1376.
Puhalla, J. E. 1985. Classification of strains of Fusarium oxysporum on the basis of vegetative compatibility. Can. J. Bot. 63:179-183.
Rodriguez, R. J., and Yoder, O. C. 1991. A family of conserved repetitive DNA elements from the fungal plant pathogen Glomerella cingulata (Colletotrichum lindemuthianum). Exp. Mycol. 15:232-242.
Sambrook, J., Fritsch, E. F., and Maniatis, T. 1989. Molecular Cloning: A Laboratory Manual. 2nd ed. Cold Spring Harbor Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.
Smith, B. J. 1986. First report of Colletotrichum acutatum on strawberry in the United States. Plant Dis. 70:1074.
Smith, B. J., and Black, L. L. 1990. Morphological, cultural, and pathogenic variation among Colletotrichum species isolated from strawberry. Plant Dis. 74:69-76.
Sreenivasaprasad, S., Brown, A. E., and Mills, P. R. 1992. DNA sequence variation and interrelationships among Colletotrichum species causing strawberry anthracnose. Physiol. Mol. Plant Pathol. 41:265-281.
Sturgess, O. W. 1954. A strawberry ripe fruit rot. Queensl. Agric. J. 78:269-270.
Sutton, B. C. 1992. The genus Glomerella and its anamorph Colletotrichum. Pages 1-26 in: Colletotrichum Biology, Pathology and Control. J. A. Bailey
