Influence of Temperature and Wetness Duration on Conidia and Appressoria of Colletotrichum acutatum on Symptomless Strawberry Leaves
Vol. 93, No. 4, 2003
Epidemiology
Influence of Temperature and Wetness Duration on Conidia and Appressoria of Colletotrichum acutatum on Symptomless Strawberry Leaves
L. F. S. Leandro, M. L. Gleason, F. W. Nutter, Jr., S. N. Wegulo, and P. M. Dixon
First, second, third, and fourth authors: Department of Plant Pathology; fifth author: Department of Statistics, Iowa State University, Ames 50011.
Accepted for publication 6 November 2002.
ABSTRACT
Leandro, L. F. S., Gleason, M. L., Nutter, F. W., Jr., Wegulo, S. N., and Dixon, P. M. 2003. Influence of temperature and wetness duration on conidia and appressoria of Colletotrichum acutatum on symptomless strawberry leaves. Phytopathology 93:513-520.
Strawberry leaves (cv. Tristar) inoculated with Colletotrichum acutatum conidia were incubated at 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, and 35°C under continuous wetness and at 25°C under six intermittent wetness regimes. The number of conidia and appressoria was quantified on excised leaf disks. To assess pathogen survival, inoculated leaves were frozen and incubated to induce acervular development. Germination, secondary conidiation, and appressorial development were significantly affected by temperature and wetness treatments (P < 0.05). Under continuous wetness, the optimum temperature range for conidial germination was 23.0 to 27.7°C, while the optimum temperature for appressorial development ranged from 17.6 to 26.5°C. Secondary conidiation showed an optimum temperature range of 21.3 to 32.7°C and was most abundant between 12 and 36 hours after inoculation. Conidial germination, appressorial production, and secondary conidiation were favored by increasing wetness duration, with more than 4 hours of wetness required for secondary conidiation. In a greenhouse, C. acutatum survived up to 8 weeks on leaves. The number of acervuli formed on leaves after freezing and incubation
The epidemiology of C. acutatum on strawberry has been well characterized with regard to splash dispersal of conidia, infection and sporulation on fruit, and survival in plant debris and soil. Little is known, however, about the behavior of C. acutatum on symptomless plants prior to the onset of an epidemic. C. acutatum conidia can germinate, form appressoria, and produce secondary conidia on symptomless strawberry leaves when incubated at 26°C under continuous wetness. The fungus was also shown to survive under greenhouse conditions on asymptomatic leaves of several plant species. These studies suggested that symptomless foliage might play an important role in the anthracnose disease cycle, both as a refuge for fungal survival and a source of inoculum for fruit and flower infections. Temperature and wetness have been reported to affect mycelial growth, germination, and sporulation of C. acutatum on agar, as well as infection and sporulation on fruit, but similar work has not been done on strawberry foliage. Furthermore, the production of secondary conidia was not addressed in these earlier studies. To develop more effective management tactics, there is a need to understand the behavior of C. acutatum on strawberry leaves under a range of environmental conditions. The objectives of this study were to (i) determine the effects of temperature and intermittent wetness on germination and secondary conidiation of C. acutatum on strawberry leaves, and (ii) assess the potential for C. acutatum to survive on symptomless strawberry leaves. A preliminary report has been published.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Plant production and maintenance. Day-neutral strawberry crowns (cv. Tristar) were planted in 15-cm-diameter plastic pots containing a 1:2:1 mixture of peat, perlite, and soil, and grown in a greenhouse at 25 ± 10°C with a 16-hour photoperiod. The plants were drip-irrigated and fertilized with a solution of a 21-5-20 fertilizer as needed. For each experiment, newly emerged leaves were tagged 7 to 14 days before inoculation to ensure uniformity of leaf age.
Inoculum production. Isolate HF-ac-98 of C. acutatum was obtained from an infected strawberry fruit collected at the Iowa State University Horticulture Research Farm near Gilbert, IA, and transferred to silica gel for long-term storage. All cultures used for inoculum preparation were started
Approximately 5 ml of conidial suspension was sprayed over a 20- × 30-cm area, resulting in an average application of 40 conidia mm–2 of leaf area. The leaves and wire mesh were returned to the boxes, which were then sealed in plastic bags to maintain approximately 100% relative humidity and incubated at 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, or 35°C (±1°C) in darkness. The temperature in the incubators was monitored and recorded every 15 minutes using WatchDog Data Loggers.
Four leaves were sampled arbitrarily from each incubator at 6, 12, 18, 24, 36, 60, 84, and 132 hours after inoculation. Two leaf disks were excised from each leaf, one on either side of the central vein of the middle leaflet, using a 1-cm-diameter cork borer. The disks were mounted on a drop of Hoyer’s medium, stained with a drop of 0.1% aniline blue in lactophenol, covered with a glass coverslip, and observed under a light microscope. The total number of germinated and ungerminated conidia was counted in each of 16 microscope fields per leaf disk. A conidium was considered germinated when it had formed either a germ tube at least as long as its width, an appressorium (a globose, septum-delimited structure formed on germ tubes or sessile to conidia), or a conidial phialide. Unmelanized and melanized appressoria were also counted. The number of conidia with a secondary conidium still attached to a conidial or hyphal phialide was quantified to estimate secondary conidiation. The total number of conidia (ungerminated + germinated) and total appressoria (unmelanized + melanized) was calculated. Data were expressed on an area basis (square millimeter) by dividing the total number of conidia or appressoria in each leaf disk by the area of 16 microscope fields observed per disk. Eight disks were counted at each sampling time, and the experiment was repeated once.
Germination and conidiation of C. acutatum were further investigated on the leaf surface of intact strawberry plants incubated at 25 ± 2°C under intermittent wetness. In order to establish six wet/dry treatment regimes, plants were alternated between dew chambers for the wet periods and a growth chamber for the dry periods. Treatments were defined by the ratio of dry to wet hours per day as follows: 0/24, 4/20, 8/16, 12/12, 16/8, and 24/0. The 24-hour cycles were repeated for 7 days. All plants were watered daily at the start of each cycle and kept under a 12-hour dark/12-hour light regime.
Ten plants assigned to each treatment were distributed within dew chambers and growth chambers according to a split-plot design with two blocks, using the day of sampling as the whole-plot treatment and the wet/dry regime as the sub-plot treatment. Each plant was spray-inoculated with a conidial suspension, using an atomizer, until all leaves were thoroughly covered with inoculum but no runoff occurred. Following inoculation, plants wer
Initial conidial populations on the leaves were estimated using an additional set of eight plants that were inoculated, dried, and sampled immediately after inoculation (time zero assessment). Two tagged leaves from each of two plants per treatment were sampled at the end of the 24-h cycle on days 1, 2, 3, 5, and 7 after inoculation. Two leaf disks excised from the middle leaflet of each leaf (a total of eight disks per treatment per sampling time) were prepared for microscopic observation, and conidial and appressorial numbers were quantified as described previously. The experiment was repeated once.
Survival experiments. Survival of Colletotrichum acutatum on symptomless leaves was investigated using leaves remaining on inoculated plants that had been exposed to the wet/dry treatment regimes in the intermittent wetness experiment. At the end of the 7-day incubation period, plants were dried with fans and all inoculated leaves were tagged to distinguish them from newly emerging, noninoculated leaves. The plants were then transferred to a greenhouse bench where they were maintained at 30 ± 10°C and drip irrigated to prevent free moisture on leaves. In both runs of the experiment, one tagged leaf was sampled from each of four plants per treatment at 1, 2, 4, 6, and 8 weeks after transfer to the greenhouse bench. In the second run, leaves were also sampled on the day of transfer from the chambers to the greenhouse bench (week 0). Sampled leaves were bagged and frozen overnight to kill leaf tissue and incubated for 7 days at 25°C and 100% relative humidity in moist chambers, as described previously, to induce acervular development by C. acutatum. The total number of acervuli on the middle leaflet of each leaf, counted with a dissecting microscope (×10), was divided by the leaflet area, measured with a leaf area meter (Model 3100; Li-Cor, Lincoln, NE), to estimate the number of acervuli per square centimeter.
Quadratic regression analysis results for the effects of temperature on numbers of germinated conidia, conidia producing secondary conidia, total conidia, and appressoria on
Data analysis. Quadratic regression analysis was performed on data from the temperature experiment using the general linear models (GLM) procedure of SAS. Temperature optima and confidence intervals for each type of measurement were estimated based on Fieller’s theorem. Linear regression analysis was conducted using the GLM procedure on data for the intermittent wetness experiment, excluding data for the 0 h wetness treatment. Survival on leaves was analyzed separately for each run of the experiment according to a randomized complete block design with two replications. Area under the curve (AUC) values were calculated and compared using Duncan’s multiple range test. Nonlinear regression analysis was performed using SigmaPlot 2000 to determine the relationship between the number of acervuli formed on leaves after freezing and the number of appressoria on leaves at week 0 of the survival experiment (i.e., day 7 of the intermittent wetness experiment). Statistical significance of all analyses was expressed at the P < 0.05 threshold.
RESULTS
Temperature experiments. C. acutatum conidia germinated, formed appressoria, and produced secondary conidia at all temperatures studied. The timing and magnitude of these processes were significantly affected by temperature. An optimum temperature range of 23.0 to 27.7°C was observed for conidial germination within 12 h after inoculation; however, by 18 h, the number of germinated conidia was similar among temperatures. After 60 h, the number of germinated conidia tended to decrease with increasing temperature, probably due to cell lysis. Conidia appeared unusually swollen and highly vacuolated at 35°C starting 12 h after inoculation.
Temperature significantly influenced the production of secondary conidia on the surface of symptomless leaves, determined by the number of conidia observed with a secondary conidium attached to a conidial or hyphal phialide. The optimum temperature for secondary conidiation ranged from approximately 21.3 to 32.7°C between 12 and 36 h after inoculation. Secondary conidiation was rare at 10°C and at sampling times greater than 36 h after inoculation. Production of secondary conidia increased the total number of conidia on the surface of symptomless leaves, particularly at 25 and 30°C, where the total conidia more than doubled during the experiment. Although the number of germinated conidia began to decrease by 60 h, this decrease was counterbalanced by high numbers of ungerminated conidia produced by secondary conidiation at these temperatures.
Production of appressoria was favored by cooler temperatures tha
Intermittent wetness. Conidial germination, secondary conidiation, and appressorial development were significantly affected by the wet/dry treatment regime at 25°C. Conidial germination increased with the daily period of wetness duration, indicated by the positive slopes of the regression, and never occurred in the continuously dry treatment. The number of germinated conidia was largest 1 day after inoculation in all treatments with at least 8 hours of wetness per day and then decreased over time in all treatments. Production of secondary conidia occurred mainly within 1 day after inoculation and was rare at later sampling times. Secondary conidiation was observed only in treatments with more than 4 hours of wetness per day and increased with the increasing wetness period within 1 day after inoculation. Consequently, total conidial numbers were greater under continuous wetness than in any other treatment 1 day after inoculation. Total conidia then tended to decrease over time in all treatments. Appressorial production increased with daily wetness duration at each sampling time and, in contrast to conidia, did not tend to decrease over the experiment period. Wetness duration also affected appressorial melanization. Melanization never occurred on appressoria formed with 4 hours of wetness and was most pronounced in treatments with at least 12 hours of wetness, in which approximately 90% of appressoria became melanized.
Survival. The number of acervuli formed on leaves after freezing and incubation treatment decreased with time after transferring plants, which had been inoculated and incubated under different intermittent wetness regimes, to the greenhouse bench. There were significantly more acervuli on leaves incubated under continuous wetness than on leaves from any other treatment in both runs of the experiment. In the first run, acervular numbers were also significantly higher in the treatment with 16 hours of wetness than in those with shorter wetness durations. At each sampling time, the number of acervuli formed on leaves was closely related to the number of appressoria on the leaves before freezing.
The table presents a linear regression analysis of the effects of intermittent wetness on the numbers of germinated conidia, conidia producing secondary conidia, total conidia, and appressoria on the surface of strawberry leaves inoculated with Colletotrichum acutatum and incubated at 25°C. It includes the count, incubation period in days, y-intercept, linear slope, R² value, and p-value for lack of fit for each category. Significant p-values indicate a notable lack of fit, highlighting the impact of wetness duration on the
This study indicates that temperature and the duration of intermittent wetness periods affect germination, secondary conidiation, and appressorial development of C. acutatum on symptomless strawberry leaves. The optimum temperature range of 23 to 27°C observed for conidial germination is similar to that previously reported for germination and mycelial growth rates of C. acutatum in culture and for infection and sporulation on strawberry fruit. Others have reported reduced or no growth of C. acutatum on agar at temperatures above 33°C and attributed low incidence of strawberry fruit infection at 35°C to high pathogen mortality. In our study, a higher incidence of conidial lysis at 35°C may explain the decrease in conidial populations observed on leaves under continuous wetness at this temperature. Reports on the effects of wetness duration on C. acutatum have been limited to studies on strawberry fruit or in vitro. Fruit rot incidence increased with wetness duration, and germination on glass slides was greatly reduced when relative humidity was below 91%. In our study, conidial germination was also favored by increasing wetness duration and was very low when daily wetness periods were less than 4 hours. We previously reported the production of secondary conidia by C. acutatum on symptomless strawberry leaves at 26°C during continuous wetness. Induction of secondary conidiation by other fungal species has been associated with high inoculum density, germination autoinhibitors, nutrient limitation, and high temperature stress. Temperature and wetness effects on secondary conidiation of C. acutatum had not been investigated previously. In our study, secondary conidiation was observed as soon as 12 hours after conidial germination between 20 and 30°C, suggesting a potential for rapid inoculum increase on symptomless plants under favorable environmental conditions. The fact that most secondary conidiation was detected within 24 hours after inoculation in both temperature and wetness experiments suggests that C. acutatum may lose its capacity to multiply in this manner after prolonged periods, possibly due to depletion of conidial energy reserves. The nutrient source for such multiplication is unclear, but previous studies with C. acutatum showed that the presence of the host was not required.
Appressoria serve as infection and survival structures in Colletotrichum spp. Appressorial development by this group of fungi is affected by several factors including nutrient stress, host surface characteristics, phylloplane microorganisms, temperature, and light intensity. In our study, appressorial production was favored by cool temperatures and was severely impaired at 35°C. Similar results have been obtained on agar, where C. acutatum showed an optimum range for appressorial production at 20 to 25°C but lost the capacity to produce these structures at 30°C. As with germination and secondary conidiation, appressorial production and melanization increased with wetness duration, but in contrast to co
The broad temperature and wetness tolerance of appressorial production by C. acutatum suggests it is well adapted to survival on strawberry leaves under conditions that are suboptimal for conidial germination and multiplication. More rapid appressorial production at 23 to 26°C compared with other temperatures may, however, indicate that the pathogen has the ability to form survival structures even when optimum conditions for germination and secondary conidiation are present for relatively short periods. In our study, C. acutatum survived for up to 8 weeks on strawberry leaves under dry greenhouse conditions. In a similar study, this fungus survived for over 3 months on symptomless foliage of strawberry and nonhost plants. C. acutatum was also shown to survive for up to 6 months on mummified strawberry fruit, 9 months in soil, and 2 years on pine debris. Survival of the fungus on strawberry and other hosts may occur as melanized appressoria, conidia, or quiescent infections. The strong relationship between appressoria and acervuli on leaves in our experiments suggests that C. acutatum survived dry conditions primarily as appressoria. Although the number of acervuli decreased rapidly over time, even the lowest acervular densities observed in our study might give rise to substantial inoculum levels because each acervulus contains many conidia. Multiplication of C. acutatum on symptomless foliage prior to the appearance of fruit rot or other symptoms may set the stage for epidemics that occur in strawberry production fields. Early suppression of fungal multiplication could therefore delay the onset of epidemics and reduce disease levels. For example, reduction of C. acutatum inoculum on transplant foliage may contribute to the effectiveness of fungicide dips used in Israel to control strawberry anthracnose. Although most evidence for the role of symptomless foliage as a source of inoculum for strawberry anthracnose originates from controlled environment studies, symptomless leaves provided sufficient inoculum to initiate fruit rot development in preliminary field trials. These preliminary results corroborate the relevance of our findings to the behavior of C. acutatum under field conditions.
Did you know that certain fungi can survive extreme conditions for years, showcasing their
The broad temperature and wetness tolerance of appressorial production by C. acutatum suggests it is well adapted to survive on strawberry leaves under conditions that are suboptimal for conidial germination and multiplication. More rapid appressorial production at 23 to 26°C compared with other temperatures may indicate that the pathogen has the ability to form survival structures even when optimum conditions for germination and secondary conidiation are present for relatively short periods. In our study, C. acutatum survived for up to 8 weeks on strawberry leaves under dry greenhouse conditions. In a similar study, this fungus survived for over 3 months on symptomless foliage of strawberry and nonhost plants. C. acutatum was also shown to survive for up to 6 months on mummified strawberry fruit, 9 months in soil, and 2 years on pine debris. Survival of the fungus on strawberry and other hosts may occur as melanized appressoria, conidia, or quiescent infections. The strong relationship between appressoria and acervuli on leaves in our experiments suggests that C. acutatum survived dry conditions primarily as appressoria. Although the number of acervuli decreased rapidly over time, even the lowest acervular densities observed in our study might give rise to substantial inoculum levels because each acervulus contains many conidia.
Multiplication of C. acutatum on symptomless foliage prior to the appearance of fruit rot or other symptoms may set the stage for epidemics that occur in strawberry production fields. Early suppression of fungal multiplication could therefore delay the onset of epidemics and reduce disease levels. For example, reduction of C. acutatum inoculum on transplant foliage may contribute to the effectiveness of fungicide dips used in Israel to control strawberry anthracnose. Although most evidence for the role of symptomless foliage as a source of inoculum for strawberry anthracnose originates from controlled environment studies, symptomless leaves provided sufficient inoculum to initiate fruit rot development in preliminary field trials. These preliminary results corroborate the relevance of our findings to the behavior of C. acutatum under field conditions.
The study assessed the survival of Colletotrichum acutatum on strawberry leaves incubated at 25°C under different wet/dry treatment regimes for 7 days, followed by maintenance under dry conditions for up to 8 weeks. Survival was evaluated by freezing the leaves overnight and incubating at 25°C and 100% relative humidity for 7 days to stimulate acervuli formation. The results indicated varying numbers of acervuli per cm² of leaf area across different treatment regimes. Specifically, treatments with longer wet durations yielded higher acervuli counts, with the highest observed at 24 hours wet and 0 hours dry, while shorter wet durations resulted in minimal acervuli formation. These findings highlight the significant impact of wet/dry
This study provides strong evidence that C. acutatum can become established, persist, and produce inoculum on symptomless strawberry leaves under a range of temperatures and intermittent wetness periods. In addition to our previous work at 26°C under continuous wetness, we have now shown that secondary conidia and appressoria may be produced under environmental conditions typical of many temperate strawberry-producing areas in the world. The survival of C. acutatum on strawberry leaves has implications for long-distance dissemination on transplants, as well as proliferation and dissemination of the fungus within production fields. Furthermore, asymptomatic foliage of other plant species, including weeds, has been recently suggested as an additional inoculum source for C. acutatum. The environmental biology of C. acutatum on symptomless foliage should therefore be considered when developing management practices for strawberry anthracnose.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was partially funded by grants from the North American Strawberry Growers Association and the Leopold Center for Sustainable Agriculture, as well as a Praxis XXI scholarship to L. F. S. Leandro from the Fundação para a Ciência e Tecnologia, Portugal. Journal Paper 19785 of the Iowa Agriculture and Home Economics Experiment Station, Ames, Iowa, Project 3564, was supported by Hatch Act and State funds. We thank R. Sakuma (Norcal, Inc.) for supplying strawberry crowns for our experiments.
LITERATURE CITED
Freeman, S., Nizani, Y., Dotan, S., Even, S., and Sando, T. 1997. Control of Colletotrichum acutatum in strawberry under laboratory, greenhouse, and field conditions. Plant Dis. 81:749-752. Hartman, J. 2001. Anthracnose of greenhouse and outdoor strawberries. Kentucky Pest News 908:5-6. Howard, C. M., Chandler, C. K., and Albregts, E. E. 1991. Strawberry anthracnose in Florida. Pages 219-220 in: The Strawberry into the 21st Century: Proc. North Am. Strawberry Conf., 3rd ed. A. Dale and J. Luby, eds. Timber Press, Portland, OR. Howard, C. M., Maas, J. L., Chandler, C. K., and Albregts, E. E. 1992. Anthracnose of strawberry caused by the Colletotrichum complex in Florida. Plant Dis. 76:976-981. King, W. T., Madden, L. V., Ellis, M. A., and Wilson, L. L. 1997. Effects of temperature on sporulation and latent period of Colletotrichum spp. infecting strawberry fruit. Plant Dis. 81:77-84. Leandro, L. F. S., Gleason, M. L., Nutter, F. W., Jr., Wegulo, S. N., and Dixon, P. M. 2001. Germination and sporulation of Colletotrichum acutatum on symptomless strawberry leaves. Phytopathology 91:659-664. Leandro, L. F. S., Gleason, M. L., Wegulo, S. N., and Nutter, F. W., Jr. 2001. Environmental factors affecting germination and sporulation of Colletotrichum acutatum on symptomless strawberry leaves. (Abstr.) Phytopathology 91(suppl.)
. Lee, D. H. 1993. Effect of temperature on the conidium germination and appressorium formation of Colletotrichum acutatum, C. dematium, and C. gloeosporioides. (Abstr.) Korean J. Mycol. 21:224-229. Legard, D. E. 2000. Colletotrichum diseases of strawberry in Florida. Pages 292-299 in: Colletotrichum: Host Specificity, Pathology and Host–Pathogen Interaction. D. Prusky, D. Freeman, and M. B. Dickman, eds. The American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. Lingappa, B. T., and Lingappa, Y. 1969. Role of auto-inhibitors on mycelial growth and dimorphism of Glomerella cingulata. *J. Gen.
Academic Press, New York. 33. Peterson, R. A. 1977. Green leaves as a source of inoculum for anthracnose fungi, with special reference to Colletotrichum acutatum on strawberry. MS thesis. University of Queensland, Australia. 34. Prusky, D., and Plumbley, R. A. 1992. Quiescent infections of Colletotrichum in tropical and subtropical fruits. Pages 289-307 in: Colletotrichum: Biology, Pathology and Control. J. A. Bailey and M. J. Jeger, eds. CAB International, Wallingford, U.K. 35. Slade, S. J., Harris, R. F., Smith, C. S., and Andrews, J. H. 1987. Microcyclic conidiation and spore-carrying capacity of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides on solid media. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 53:2106-2110. 36. Smith, B. J. 1998. Anthracnose fruit rot (black spot). Pages 31-33 in: Compendium of Strawberry Diseases. 2nd ed. J. L. Maas, ed. The American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. 37. Smith, B. J., and Black, L. L. 1990. Morphological, cultural, and pathogenic variation among Colletotrichum species isolated from strawberry. Plant Dis. 74:69-76. 38. Smith, J. E., Anderson, J. G., Deans, S. G., and Berry, D. R. 1981. Biochemistry of microcycle conidiation. Pages 329-356 in: Biology of Conidial Fungi, Vol. 2. G. T. Cole and B. Kendrick, eds. Academic Press, New York. 39. Wilson, L. L., Madden, L. V., and Ellis, M. A. 1990. Influence of temperature and wetness duration on infection of immature and mature strawberry fruit by Colletotrichum acutatum. Phytopathology 80:111-116. 40. Wilson, L. L., Madden, L. V., and Ellis, M. A. 1992. Overwinter survival of Colletotrichum acutatum in infected strawberry fruit in Ohio. Plant Dis. 76:948-950. 41. Wise, K. A., Leandro, L. F. S., Wegulo, S. N., and Gleason, M. L. 2002. Survival and dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum on strawberry leaves under field conditions. (Abstr.) Phytopathology 92(suppl.)
. 42. Yang, X., Madden, L. V., Wilson, L. L., and Ellis, M. A. 1990. Effects of surface topography and rain intensity on splash dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum. Phytopathology 80:1115-1120. 43. Yang, X., Wilson, L. L.,
