Inheritance of Resistance to 'Colletotrichum' Species in Strawberry
Received defrayed paper the fact. 724 J. AMER. Soc. HORT. SCI. 116(4):724-727. 1991. Inheritance of Resistance to Colletotrichum Species in Strawberry Creighton L. Gupton and Barbara J. Smith U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Small Fruit Research Station, P. O. Box 287, Poplarville, MS 39470
Additional index words: anthracnose crown rot, strawberry breeding, heritability, genetic variance, epistasis, Fragaria × ananassa
Abstract. Experiments were conducted to estimate the relative importance of additive and dominance genetic variances and non-allelic interactions in the inheritance of resistance to Colletotrichum spp. in strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa Duch.). Progeny of 40 parents crossed in a Comstock and Robinson Design II mating scheme were inoculated with three isolates of C. fragariae and one isolate of C. acutatum. Disease development on each plant was rated visually. Variance components were estimated and converted to genetic variances. Estimates of genetic variance were six to ten times higher than those for within-family variance not accounted for by epistasis, which equaled 35% and 38% of the total genetic variance in females and males, respectively, indicating probable epistatic effects. The frequency distribution of disease severity ratings was bimodal in both experiments, suggesting major gene action. Narrow-sense heritability estimates were 0.37 and 0.26, and broad-sense heritability estimates were 0.87 and 0.85 for females and males, respectively. Narrow-sense heritability estimates are probably sufficient to produce gains from recurrent selection. Gains from selection of clonal value should be possible because of the high broad-sense heritability estimates. It appears feasible to establish a broad genetic-based population resistant to Colletotrichum spp. from which selections could be evaluated per se and/or recombined to produce improved populations.
Anthracnose crown rot, caused by Colletotrichum fragariae Brooks, is probably the most limiting factor in strawberry production in the Gulf South states of the United States. Smith and Black (1986) found that C. acutatum Simmonds caused a similar crown rot. The disease has revolutionized strawberry culture in the traditional Louisiana production region, causing growers to change cultivars and plant production methods. Plants are now obtained from nurseries outside the Gulf South rather than being produced on the farms. The locally adapted ‘Tangi’ is no longer widely grown because it is not available from nurseries outside of Louisiana. ‘Chandler’ and other California cultivars currently grown because of their availability appear to be susceptible to common leaf spot (Mycosphaerella fragariae), gray mold fruit rot (Botrytis cinerea), angular leaf spot (Xanthomonas fragariae), and C. acutatum fruit rot when grown in Louisiana.
We found no reports on the inheritance of resistance to C. fragariae in the literature. Such information is needed to determine the most efficient breeding methodology. A preliminary study (Expt. 1) was conducted in 1985 to determine the feasibility of esti
Six strawberry clones that varied in origin and reported response to C. fragariae were randomly designated as three male and three female parents. Each female was crossed with each male parent to produce nine full-sib families. A total of 57 seedlings from each family were propagated by runners to produce four genetically identical plants from each seedling. One of the four plants originating from a seedling was inoculated with each of three C. fragariae isolates and one C. acutatum isolate, ensuring that each isolate was tested on identical genotypes. The C. fragariae isolates CF-63, LA-1, and Fla-1 were among the most virulent isolates evaluated in a previous study and were isolated from strawberry plants in three states. In the same study, Goff was the most virulent C. acutatum isolate. Inoculum of each isolate was prepared at a concentration of 1.5 × 10^6 conidia/ml and sprayed on the plants to runoff. Plants were inoculated with the C. fragariae isolate CF-63 on December 4, LA-1 on December 12, and Fla-1 on December 20, 1985, and with the C. acutatum isolate Goff on January 21, 1986. The inoculated plants were incubated in an unlighted dew chamber at 31 ± 2°C and 100% relative humidity for 48 hours, then returned to a greenhouse held between 20 and 28°C with a 16-hour photoperiod. After 12 days, the disease severity of each plant was rated as follows: 0 = no disease symptom, 1 = fleck on petiole, 2 = lesions 3 to 10 mm long, 3 = lesions 11 to 20 mm long, 4 = lesions >20 mm long, 5 = youngest leaf wilted, and 6 = plant dead. Environmental variance was estimated as the within-clone variance of 148 plants from 37 clones inoculated with isolate CF-63. Analyses of genetic variance were performed using general linear model procedures. Variance components were then estimated by standard methods, after which estimates of genetic variances were computed. Narrow-sense heritability was estimated in the standard manner using pooled data to compute the numerator.
Forty parents were employed, including selections containing diverse germplasm developed in California, Maryland, Kansas, North Carolina, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Florida, plus two cultivars. The parents were randomly allocated to four sets of 10. Clones within each set were randomly designated as five males and five females that were crossed in a Comstock and Robinson Design II mating scheme. A 100% success rate with each cross would have resulted in 25 full-sib families from each set. However, due to either poor seed set or lack of germination, plants from 87 out of 100 possible families were available for evaluation. From 12 to 16 seedlings per family were vegetatively propagated by runners to obtain three genetically identical plants from each seedling. One plant originating from each seedling was inoculated with C. fragariae isolates CF-63 and MS-9, and C. acutatum isolate Mil-1, ensuring each isolate was tested on identical genotypes. Isolates CF-63 and MS-9 were chosen for their morphological distinctiveness and differing pathogenicity; isolate Mil-1 was selected as a representative of C. acutatum. Inoculum preparation and inoculati
The experiments with isolates CF-63 and Mil-1 were conducted from 27 May to 10 June, and isolate MS 9 was used from 3 to 14 June 1988. These isolates were incubated in a dew chamber at 100% relative humidity and 31 ± 1°C for 48 hours, after which they were returned to a greenhouse at ambient temperatures. All plants were rated for disease severity 20 days after inoculation using the same scale as in Experiment 1. An estimate of the genetic variance was obtained from 321 plants from 10 clones inoculated with isolates CF-63 and Mil-1, treated similarly to the progenies. Genetic variances were estimated in the same manner as in the earlier experiment. Narrow (h²) and broad (H²) sense heritability estimates were computed by standard methods (Hallaeur and Miranda, 1981).
Results
Experiment 1: The mean disease severity rating for isolate Goff (2.5) was significantly lower than that for CF-63 (3.7), Fla-1 (3.7), or La-1 (3.3), indicating that C. acutatum produced a less severe disease reaction than C. fragariae. Despite this difference, the genetic response to the two pathogen species appears similar, as indicated by a lack of genotype × isolate interactions. Isolates were pooled to estimate genetic parameters because neither the male nor female × isolate source of variation was significant. The additive genetic variance estimate (0.39) was more than four times larger than that for dominance (0.09). The within-family variance not accounted for by additive or dominance estimates (0.39) equaled 45% of the total genetic variance (0.86). The narrow-sense heritability estimate of 0.89 was very high.
Experiment 2: The mean disease severity rating for C. acutatum isolate Mil-1 (2.8) was significantly lower than the ratings for C. fragariae isolates MS-9 (3.4) and CF-63 (3.2). Neither the male nor female × isolate source of variation was significant, which agrees with the results of Experiment 1. Isolates were pooled to estimate genetic parameters. Estimates of genetic variances were computed for both male and female components due to unbalanced data from missing families and unequal numbers of progeny per family. However, male and female estimates were similar in each instance, with values of 0.10 and 0.17, 0.67 and 0.63, and 1.77 and 1.80, respectively. The within-family variance not accounted for equaled 35% and 38% of the total genetic variance in females and males, respectively. In contrast to Experiment 1, the estimate of dominance was considerably higher. A moderate level of heritability (0.26 for males and 0.37 for females) was estimated for resistance to three isolates of C. fragariae. Broad-sense heritability estimates (0.85 for males and 0.87 for females) were very high.
Discussion
A difference between the mean disease
Black (1990) found that most cultivars responded similarly to the two pathogen species. A similar response to each C. fragariae isolate was also indicated, but this may not be true for all isolates because Smith and Black (1990) found significant isolate × cultivar interactions when other isolates were used. The Colletotrichum spp. and race in question should probably be identified before initiating a breeding program, even though no genotype × isolate interaction was indicated in this study. The frequency distribution of disease severity ratings was bimodal in both experiments, suggesting major gene action. The large amount of within-family variance not accounted for probably indicates epistatic effects. Underestimation of could inflate, but its similar estimates of 1.33 and 1.61 using different genotypes and isolates in different years do not suggest such a bias. Wright (1956) hypothesized that large epistatic effects would be expected when biparental crosses are made in species that are normally propagated asexually. Epistatic variance was important for various commercial traits in studies by Comstock et al. (1958), Hansche et al. (1968), Watkins and Spangelo (1968), Watkins et al. (1970), and Spangelo et al. (1971), suggesting that it is a general phenomenon in strawberry. Epistatic effects are important, but those postulated in this study occurred within families and should not affect other variances computed from among-family comparisons (Shaw et al., 1989). The validity of other assumptions under which additive and dominance variances are estimated appears reasonable to accept, although some are uncertain: 1) Regular diploid behavior of octoploid strawberry at meiosis was found by Powers (1944) and Arulsekar et al. (1981). 2) The presence of minimal cytoplasmic or other maternal effects was supported by the fact that was relatively large, but it would have been underestimated if such effects were considerable (Comstock et al., 1958). 3) The assumption of no correlation of genotypes at different loci may not be tenable in Experiment 1 but probably is in Experiment 2 because the parents constitute broadly based germplasm. The parents were related in some instances; nevertheless, they represent a random sample of the population of interest. The high proportion of dominance variance in Experiment 2 compared with Experiment 1 may be accounted for by the broad-based, more representative strawberry population sample in the former. These results illustrate the possible erroneous conclusions caused by using too few parents. Assuming epistasis is important in resistance to Colletotrichum spp., it could inflate estimates (Hallaeur and Miranda, 1981). Nevertheless, gains from selection of clonal va
Comstock, R.E. and H.F. Robinson. 1952. Estimation of average dominance of genes. Heterosis. Iowa State College Press, Ames. Comstock, R.E., T. Kelleher, and E.B. Morrow. 1958. Genetic variation in an asexual species, the garden strawberry. Genetics 43:634-646. Hallauer, R.R. and J.B. Miranda. 1981. Quantitative genetics in maize breeding. Iowa State Univ. Press, Ames. J. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sci. 116(4):724-727. Hansche, P.E., R.S. Bringhurst, and V. Voth. 1968. Estimates of genetic and environmental parameters in the strawberry. Proc. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sci. 90:338-345. Powers, L. 1944. Meiotic studies of crosses between Fragaria ovalis and Fragaria × ananassa. J. Agr. Rev. 69:435-448. Shaw, D.V., R.S. Bringhurst, and V. Voth. 1989. Genetic parameters estimated for an advanced cycle strawberry breeding population at two locations. J. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sci. 114:823–827. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1986. First report of Colletotrichum acutatum on strawberry in the United States. Plant Dis. 70:1074. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1987. Resistance of strawberry plants to Colletotrichum fragariae affected by environmental conditions. Plant Dis. 71:834-837. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1990. Morphological, cultural, and pathogenic variation among Colletotrichum species isolated from strawberry. Plant Dis. 74:69-76. Spangelo, L.P.S., C.S. Hsu, S.O. Fejer, P.R. Bedard, and G. Rousselle. 1971. Heritability and genetic variance components for 20 fruit and plant characters in the cultivated strawberry. Can. J. Genet. Cytol. 13:443-456. Watkins, R. and L.P.S. Spangelo. 1968. Components of genetic variance in the cultivated strawberry. Genetics 59:93-103. Watkins, R., L.P.S. Spangelo, and A.T. Bolton. 1970. Genetic variance components in cultivated strawberry. Can. J. Genet. Cytol. 12:52-59. Wright, S
