HORTSCIENCE, VOL. 37(4), JULY 2002
BREEDING, CULTIVARS, ROOTSTOCKS, & GERMPLASM RESOURCES
HORTSCIENCE 37(4):686–690. 2002.
Inheritance of Resistance to Colletotrichum acutatum Simmonds on Runners of Garden Strawberry and its Backcrosses
Gustavo Giménez, Instituto Nacional de Investigación Agropecuaria, INIA Las Brujas, Ruta 48 Km 10, CC 33085, Canelones, Uruguay
James R. Ballington, Department of Horticultural Science, Box 7609, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695-7609
Additional index words: diallel analysis, quantitative genetics, anthracnose, Fragaria ×ananassa, Fragaria chiloensis, Fragaria virginiana
Abstract. Two half diallel mating designs were conducted to study the inheritance of resistance to Colletotrichum acutatum Simmonds on runners of strawberry. The main design included six genotypes representing a range of responses to the pathogen: ‘Chandler’ (very susceptible); FL 87-210 (tolerant); MS/US 541 (very resistant); NC 92-01 (Fragaria chiloensis Duch.) (resistant); NCH 87-10 (tolerant-susceptible); and NCC 89-39 (susceptible). The cross ‘Chandler’ x MS/US 541 was absent. The secondary test included ‘Chandler’ and selections FL 87-210 and NC 85-01 (Fragaria virginiana Duch.) (very resistant) as parents. Griffing’s methods 4 and 2, model I, were used to test for combining ability in the main and secondary tests, respectively. General combining ability and specific combining ability were highly significant in all analyses. This study indicated that nonadditive effects are more important than additive effects in the inheritance of resistance of runners to anthracnose. The frequency distribution of lesion lengths within progenies suggests that resistance to C. acutatum on runners is quantitative. Therefore, breeding for resistance should be accomplished using progeny testing followed by individual selection within progenies.
Inheritance of resistance to anthracnose in strawberry has been addressed by only a few authors. Gupton and Smith evaluated progenies of 40 parents crossed in a Comstock and Robinson Design II Mating scheme to determine the relative importance of the different components of genetic variance in the inheritance of resistance to Colletotrichum spp. Petiole inoculation was used for disease rating. Estimates of dominance variance were 6–10 times higher than those for additive variance. Epistatic variance accounted for 35% to 38% of the total
Plant material. Six parents that varied in reaction to C. acutatum were crossed in a half diallel design, and the resulting progenies were used in this experiment. The parents included in the main test were F. ×ananassa genotypes, except where indicated, and included: MS/US 541 (very resistant), NC 92-01 (F. chiloensis) (resistant), FL 87-210 (resistant-tolerant), NCH 87-10 (tolerant-susceptible), NCC 89-39 (susceptible-tolerant), and ‘Chandler’ (very susceptible). The F. chiloensis parent (NC 92-01) originated as an open-pollinated seedling from a mixed planting of collected wild clones of the species on a farm near Panguipulli, Chile. The total number of crosses was 15 (equal to p(p-1)/2, with p being the number of parents). Due to a mistake in handling the seeds, the cross ‘Chandler’ x MS/US 541 was improperly labeled. Therefore, it was eliminated from the analyses, and its effects were considered equal to zero in the combining ability analysis. In a secondary test, the only cross combinations successfully accomplished were with the parents NC 85-01 (F. virginiana) (very resistant), FL 87-210 (resistant-tolerant), and ‘Chandler’ (very susceptible). NC 85-01 originated from open-pollinated seed collected from a wild F. virginiana population in Wake County, N.C. Crosses were made during Spring 1994, and five hundred seeds from each cross were put under mist in 13-cm pots on sand in a greenhouse in December 1994. Once seedlings reached the two true leaf stage, they were transplanted to 40-cell plug trays containing peat substrate (Fafard Mix No.4-P; Conrad Fafard, Agawam, Mass.) and placed on greenhouse benches. Dates of transplanting depended on the rate of plant development, beginning on January 25 and finishing on February 20, 1995. A total of 80 seedlings from each cross and 25 plants from each parent were transplanted. Plants were watered daily and fertilized weekly with 20–20–20 (3 g·L–1 of water) to ensure proper growth and enhance runner formation. Flowers were completely removed from parent plants to avoid competition with runners. Seedlings were inoculated when they were approximately 4 months old and runners were at least 15 cm long. Seedlings and plants of the parents were grown in the Horticulture Greenhouse facilities on the North Carolina State University (NCSU) campus, Raleigh.
Inoculation. Milholland’s technique was used to screen progeny and parents for resistance to anthracnose. Anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum spp. is one of the most important factors limiting strawberry production in many southeastern states of the United States and became a problem in North Carolina during the mid-19
The most virulent isolate of C. acutatum (CA-1) evaluated in a previous study was grown on potato dextrose agar (PDA) medium in petri dishes for 10 days at room temperature (25 °C) under continuous fluorescent light. Conidia were washed from the surface of the colony, filtered through cheesecloth, and suspended in sterile distilled water. Two drops per liter of the surfactant Tween 20 were added to the conidial suspension. The concentration of the inoculum was adjusted with a hemocytometer to 1 × 10^6 conidia/mL. Runners of the seedlings were carefully sprayed to runoff using a hand sprayer. Once the inoculum dried, inoculated plants were placed in a wet chamber at 28 °C and 100% relative humidity for 48 hours and then returned to a greenhouse held between 21 and 28 °C. Twenty seedlings of each cross and five plants of each parent were inoculated each time, and the test was repeated four times during Summer 1995 (80 plants/cross; 25 plants/parent). Disease development in each of two runners per plant was recorded 11 days after inoculation. A total of 1,280 seedlings from crosses and 175 plants of the parents were screened for resistance, including the main and secondary tests with four replications. Inoculations and incubation in the moist chamber were conducted at the Castle Hayne Research Station, Castle Hayne, N.C. Incubation and disease readings were done in the Horticulture Greenhouses on the NCSU Campus.
Disease severity was rated according to the length of lesion development on the runner: 0.0–1.9 cm = resistant; 2.0–2.9 cm = intermediate; and >3.0 cm = susceptible. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed using the general linear models procedure (PROC GLM, SAS Institute, Cary, N.C.). Estimates of general and specific combining ability were determined using the standard methodology for analyzing data from diallel crosses. Method 4, model I (fixed), based on F1’s, and Method 2, model I (fixed), based on parents and F1’s (half diallel), were used for the analysis of the main and secondary tests, respectively. These methods and models for combining ability analysis were selected because of the characteristics of the experiments of this study (i.e., a reduced number of parents were used without reciprocal crosses). When a limited number of parents are evaluated (<10) and the selection of these parents cannot be considered random, then a fixed model is recommended. Griffing’s analysis of combining ability requires no special genetic assumptions beyond those necessary for the ANOVA and has been used to convey reliable information on the combining potential of parents. Baker concluded that diallel analyses should be used only to estimate combining ability, and to attempt to interpret diallel statistics in terms of components of genetic variance is subject to failure in either of both assumptions of independent distribution of genes in the parent and absence of epistasis unless parents have been produced by a process of random mating and nonselective inbreeding.
The ANOVA for the main test showed highly significant differences among genotypes. The general combining ability (GCA) and specific combining ability (SCA) mean squares were highly significant, suggesting that additive and non-additive effects were involved in the inheritance of resistance to isolate CA-1 of C. acutatum on runners in these populations.
Parent means for mean lesion length confirmed the resistance designations of these parental genotypes. General combining ability (GCA) effects for the parents refer to the average performance of a parent in hybrid combinations. Negative values of GCA for a parent indicate that the hybrids involving that particular parent had shorter lesion lengths than the average of all hybrids. In contrast, positive values of GCA for a parent indicate that the hybrids of this parent had longer lesions than the average of all hybrids. Parents with high negative GCA values represent a useful source for runner resistance, which is crucial for preventing plant and fruit infection in the field. Therefore, based on GCA, the best parents for resistance were MS/US 541 and FL 87-210. The highest GCA for susceptibility was recorded for ‘Chandler’.
The specific combining ability (SCA) for mean lesion length of each hybrid combination measured whether the performance of a progeny is superior or inferior to the average performance of the parents involved. A negative value of SCA for a particular combination indicates a shorter mean lesion length for that progeny than would be expected based on the average performance of the parents. Overall, there did not appear to be much relationship between SCA values and the number of resistant seedlings. The largest deviation from expected for shorter mean lesion lengths was obtained with the crosses NCH 87-10 x NCC 89-39 and FL 87-210 x NC 92-01. Thus, these crosses are good hybrid combinations for runner resistance to anthracnose. These two progenies also had the shortest mean lesion lengths; however, this did not translate into higher numbers of resistant seedlings compared to other parental combinations. The largest deviation for longer mean lesions was observed with the crosses FL 87-210 x NCC 89-39 and Chandler x NCH 87-10. One of these crosses, FL 87-210 x NCC 89-39, performed quite well for the number of resistant seedlings despite its high positive SCA and mean lesion length.
In a secondary test, the analysis of variance (ANOVA) for the half diallel design using only ‘Chandler’, FL 87-210, and NC 85-01 also showed highly significant differences among genotypes. Both GCA and SCA mean squares were highly significant.
The analysis of variance of differences among genotypes and combining analysis for resistance to anthracnose in the main test showed significant results. The data indicated significant differences across replications, crosses, GCA, and SCA, confirming the variability in resistance among the tested genotypes.
HORTSCIENCE, VOL. 37(4), JULY 2002
Significant GCA variance was much greater than SCA variance. However, the small number of parents probably influenced the results, especially SCA effects. Small partial diallels provide reasonable GCA estimates but are less efficient in detecting SCA effects (Dhillon and Singh, 1978) and are subject to large sampling errors (Christie and Shattuck, 1992). Based on GCA effects, NC 85-01 (GCA = –1.65) appeared to be a superior parent for reduced lesion length, and the combination NC 85-01 x FL 87-210 yielded twice as many resistant seedlings (30 out of 90) as the best of any other combination. Overall, these results emphasize the importance of additive and nonadditive variance in the inheritance of resistance to anthracnose caused by C. acutatum on strawberry runners, which agrees with Gupton and Smith’s (1991) conclusions. The GCA/SCA variance ratio can be useful for comparing the relative importance of the variance components. A relatively high ratio suggests the importance of additive gene effects, while a low ratio implies the presence of nonadditive (dominant, epistatic, or both) gene effects (Griffing, 1956). In the main experiment, although both combining abilities were significant, the SCA mean square was greater than the GCA mean square, suggesting that nonadditive inheritance is important for anthracnose resistance. Various authors have reported that nonadditive variance is important for several horticultural characteristics of strawberry, including disease resistance (Aalders and Craig, 1968; Comstock et al., 1958; Hansche et al., 1968; Spangelo et al., 1971; Watkins and Spangelo, 1971; Watkins et al., 1970). This fact should be considered in breeding for resistance to anthracnose on runners of strawberry. When nonadditive variance is present, the most appropriate breeding method is the one that exploits all the genetic variance (Watkins and Spangelo, 1968). This could be accomplished by evaluating a large number of parental combinations (progeny testing) to identify and select the best combinations for resistance to anthracnose. In a second phase, these best crosses should be grown on a larger scale to select the best genotypes among them. Recombination of the best selections can also be done to obtain improved populations. Selection in a breeding program usually involves considering several characteristics; therefore, the best crosses should combine anthracnose resistance with other desirable horticultural traits.
The frequency distribution of lesion lengths for representative progenies indicates that variation was continuous. Therefore, resistance to anthracnose caused by isolate CA-1 of C. acutatum on strawberry runners appears to be quantitative in nature. This differs from previous studies (Gupton and Smith, 1991; Faedi and De Clauser, 1991; Winterbottom et al., 1991), where major gene action was suggested for inheritance of resistance. It should be noted that the mating scheme, method of genetic analysis, parents, and isolate of C. acutatum used in this study were different from the previous ones, which could have led to different results.
The results of this study indicate that nonadditive and additive effects are important in the inheritance of resistance of strawberry runners to C. acutatum. However, since the estimate of SCA variance was greater tha
GCA variance and nonadditive inheritance appear to be more important. The frequency distribution of lesion lengths within progenies suggests that the inheritance of resistance to Colletotrichum acutatum on strawberry runners is quantitative. Therefore, genetic progress for anthracnose resistance can be made using progeny testing for the selection of the best parental combinations, followed by individual selection within the best progenies.
Literature Cited
Aalders, L.E. and D.L. Craig. 1968. General and specific combining ability in seven inbred strawberry lines. Can. J. Genet. Cytol. 10:1–6.
Baker, R.J. 1978. Issues in diallel analysis. Crop Sci. 18:533–536.
Ballington, J.R. and R.D. Milholland. 1993. Screening strawberries for resistance to Colletotrichum acutatum in North Carolina. Acta Hort. 348:442–448.
Christie, B.R. and V.I. Shattuck. 1992. The diallel cross: Design, analysis, and use for plant breeders. In: J. Janick (ed.). Plant Breeding Reviews, Vol. 9. Wiley, New York.
Comstock, R.E., T. Kelleher, and E.B. Morrow. 1958. Genetic variation in an asexual species, the garden strawberry. Genetics 43:634–646.
Delp, B.R. and R.D. Milholland. 1980. Evaluating strawberry plants for resistance to Colletotrichum fragariae. Plant Dis. 64:1071–1073.
Delp, B.R. and R.D. Milholland. 1981. Susceptibility of strawberry cultivars and related species to Colletotrichum fragariae. Plant Dis. 65:421–423.
Dhillon, B.S. and J. Singh. 1978. Evaluation of circulant partial diallel crosses in maize. Crop Improv. 2:1–8.
Faedi, W. and R. De Clauser. 1991. Screening for strawberry resistance to Colletotrichum acutatum. In: Strawberry diseases and breeding for varietal resistance. Intl. Workshop, Societé Francaise de Phytopathologie, Bordeaux, France.
Giménez, G. 1997. Resistance to Colletotrichum acutatum Simmonds in strawberry (Fragaria ×ananassa Duch.) MS thesis. North Carolina State Univ., Raleigh.
Grand, L.F., R.K. Jones, and R.D. Milholland. 1990. *Coll
