Colletotrichum acutatum J.H. Simmonds is a common pathogen affecting a wide array of crops and non-cultivated plant species. This fungus is cosmopolitan in its distribution and causes significant crop losses annually. Disease symptoms include fruit rots as well as shoot, leaf, and flower blights. Common hosts comprise many dicotyledonous plants such as strawberries, apples, citrus fruits, and stone fruits, with serious diseases also reported on leatherleaf ferns and pines. However, there are no known instances of C. acutatum affecting grasses.
Although C. acutatum has been well-documented in agricultural hosts, recent findings of its recovery from a moribund sea turtle and a native forest suggest that this fungus may inhabit other, less-studied niches. C. acutatum was first described as a separate species by Simmonds. Many isolates now classified as C. acutatum were previously included in C. gloeosporioides or were considered species of Gloeosporium. C. acutatum impacts many hosts that are also affected by other Colletotrichum species, possibly complicating its recognition as a distinct taxon. For example, strawberries can be affected by C. acutatum, C. gloeosporioides, and C. fragariae. While C. gloeosporioides and C. fragariae typically cause petiole and stolon lesions, as well as crown rot on strawberries, they can also induce fruit symptoms.
C. acutatum produces symptoms on flowers, leaves, petioles, and roots, but is primarily known for causing fruit rot in strawberries. Additionally, citrus fruits, apples, mangos, papayas, and avocados are affected by both C. acutatum and C. gloeosporioides. On citrus, C. gloeosporioides acts as a common saprophyte and can cause postharvest anthracnose from preharvest quiescent infections. In contrast, C. acutatum does not lead to postharvest anthracnose on citrus fruits but causes distinct diseases on various citrus species, such as postbloom fruit drop and key lime anthracnose. On apples, bitter rot is caused by both C. gloeosporioides and C. acutatum. A leaf spot disease caused by Glomerella cingulata has been reported in Brazil and the United States, but C. acutatum is not known to attack apple leaves.
Recent research has focused on elucidating the etiology of diseases caused by Colletotrichum species and understanding the population dynamics of these pathogens. This research emphasizes differentiating the species of Colletotrichum on each host and determining their roles in producing the observed symptoms.
Less effort has been dedicated to determining the life cycle of C. acutatum in various situations, its means of survival and dissemination, and its host specificity. In this article, we will assess the status of our knowledge on the lifestyles of C. acutatum, including infection and colonization strategies on different hosts, the role of various asexual structures such as conidia and appressoria, and the role of the sexual stage in selected disease cycles. To define lifestyles more effectively, we needed to clarify the taxonomy of the fungus and differentiate the diseases caused by C. acutatum from those caused by other species of Colletotrichum. We also explore our understanding of the ability of C. acutatum to move between hosts and cause disease, as well as the genetic relatedness of isolates of C. acutatum from different hosts. Information in some areas is limited, and we identify gaps in our understanding of diseases caused by C. acutatum and potential areas for future research.
Taxonomic Relationships
Morphology of C. acutatum. C. acutatum is an Ascomycete classified in the Pyrenomycetes and included in the family Phyllachoraceae. Colonies of C. acutatum are usually white initially and later become covered with pink to orange conidial masses. Cultures from some hosts are highly chromogenic and excrete red and pink pigments into the culture media. The primary production of conidia occurs in acervuli; however, C. acutatum is also capable of forming secondary conidia on the surface of living leaves. Conidia are usually ellipsoid and fusiform at least at one end, rather than typically having both ends rounded like C. gloeosporioides. Setae are usually sparse if produced at all. Pigmented appressoria are produced upon germination of the conidia and vary in shape and size. The sexual stage of certain genetic subgroups of C. acutatum has been characterized under laboratory conditions and has been designated as Glomerella acutata. Research has shown that a large number of isolates from diverse hosts were capable of mating and forming mature perithecia in culture. Crosses within isolates in group C, and some intergroup crosses, were highly fertile, while others were weakly fertile or infertile. However, mating compatibility in C. acutatum and other Colletotrichum species is complex.
Differentiation of C. acutatum from other species of Colletotrichum. Morphological characteristics such as colony morphology, conidial shape, the presence or absence of setae and sclerotia, and appressoria shape and size have been used for the differentiation of species in the genus Colletotrichum. Morphological traits, however, are highly variable among isolates and often subject to interpretation. Other characters, such as growth rates and sensitivity to benomyl, have been helpful in differentiating C. acutatum from C. gloeosporioides. C. acutatum is neither highly sensitive nor highly tolerant to benomyl. Levels of 0.1 to 1.0 µl/ml cause 20 to 50% growth inhibition of C. acutatum, but are usually completely inhibitory to other species of Colletotrichum. However, C. acutatum is more sensitive to benomyl than resistant isolates of other species of Colletotrichum.
A great deal of effort has been dedicated to determining which species of Colletotrichum are involved in the many anthracnose-type diseases of plants and to the development of tools to identify and differentiate them.
As pointed out by Freeman, multiple hosts can be affected by a single species, and multiple species can affect a single host. Simmonds first described C. acutatum as a new species, distinct from C. gloeosporioides, based on isolates from fruit rots in Australia. Additional detailed morphological descriptions were published later. Most fungi included in C. acutatum were formerly assigned to C. gloeosporioides, with the teleomorph being Glomerella cingulata. Many species formerly considered to be Gloeosporium are now also included in C. acutatum. In recent years, different tools, such as vegetative compatibility groups and isozymes, as well as molecular tools, such as random amplification of polymorphic DNA (RAPD), species-specific primers, and sequencing of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of nuclear ribosomal DNA and other regions of the genome, have been useful in separating C. acutatum from other species of Colletotrichum. While the role and identity of species involved in anthracnose diseases are not always clear, we now have a much better understanding of the different species and the means available to differentiate them. Almond anthracnose, for example, was thought to be caused by C. gloeosporioides, based on the morphology of the pathogen. More recently, almond isolates from California and Israel have been identified as C. acutatum, primarily by using molecular tools. Such tools have been very useful in determining not only the identities of isolates but also the relationships among them. The citrus postbloom fruit drop pathogen was also originally identified as C. gloeosporioides, but was later found to be C. acutatum.
C. acutatum sensu lato may be considered a group species, and the relationships among populations from different host plants are not clear. Two subspecific forms or physiological taxa of C. acutatum have been described: C. acutatum f. sp. pineum and C. acutatum f. sp. chromogenum. C. acutatum f. sp. pineum was not separated from C. acutatum morphologically and was designated primarily on the basis of its pathogenicity to pines. C. acutatum f. sp. chromogenum was distinguished on the basis of pink and red pigments in the agar medium in culture. Sutton did not feel either subspecific designation was valid. However, populations of C. acutatum have been characterized and studied. Lardner et al. found that C. acutatum f. sp. pineum from New Zealand and Australia formed two separate groups based on RAPD analysis and analysis of vegetative compatibility. According to Guerber et al., isolates from pine in New Zealand were clearly polyphyletic using restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) of mtDNA and the 900-bp intron of the glutamine synthase gene, as well as DNA sequences of the latter gene and of the 200 bp intron of the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene. Adaskaveg and Förster designated and mapped the distribution of two subgroups (e.g., pink and gray) of C. acutatum based on RAPD patterns and cultural morphology on almond in California over several years. Although several studies have been conducted in recent years to characterize isolates, currently there are no formally accepted subspecific nomenclatural d
Variation in colony color and morphology among cultures of Colletotrichum acutatum sensu Simmonds is observed, although chromogenic isolates are not illustrated. The variation in appearance is noted as being influenced by alternating light and dark cycles. Typical conidia are also described.
The teleomorph of Colletotrichum acutatum, known as Glomerella acutata, is characterized by its mating system on toothpicks in culture. Additionally, perithecia formed on toothpicks are detailed, with close-up views of the perithecia and observations of asci containing ascospores.
Research includes pine isolates designated as C. acutatum f. sp. pineum, and a distinct group of isolates of Glomerella miyabeana from willow. Guerber et al. supported the recognition of G. miyabeana as a distinct species from C. acutatum, but further investigations did not uphold the uniqueness of the pine group. In a separate study, C. lupini was described based on isolates from lupine, differentiated through morphological, physiological, and molecular criteria. Isolates from lupine were placed in subgroups J2 and J6, separate from other C. acutatum isolates in clades C, D, E, and J4. Despite some segregation into new species like C. lupini and G. miyabeana, C. acutatum continues to represent a genetically distinct collection of closely related isolates.
Grouping of isolates by host or geographic region does not always align with molecular groupings. Freeman et al. characterized C. acutatum isolates from Israel and identified four subgroups through PCR and DNA analyses. Subgroup I included isolates from almond, apple, peach, and pecan in the U.S., while Israeli almond isolates were categorized in subgroup IV. Guerber et al. noted that isolates from various hosts and countries shared genetic subgroup classifications, with subgroup C encompassing a diverse range of fruits and plants. However, isolates from key lime, leatherleaf fern, and lupine were placed in subgroup J. Denoyes-Rothan et al. compared isolates from strawberries and other hosts, finding that strawberry isolates from Europe and the U.S. were nearly identical, while those from other hosts showed greater variability.
Thus, the general conclusion from most of the research is that C. acutatum is composed of genetic subgroups that show little indication of host specificity, although there are some indications of specialization of certain isolates on particular hosts. As noted above, isolates from key lime formed a single group. Studies by Peres et al. using sequences of the entire ITS region and the 200-bp intron of the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase gene, as well as RAPDs, found that isolates from postbloom fruit drop–affected citrus flowers from Brazil, Costa Rica, Belize, Mexico, the Dominican Republic, and Florida were closely related and did not group based on geographic origin. Isolates from key lime from the same countries were also very closely related but differed slightly from the postbloom fruit drop isolates. Thus, isolates from postbloom fruit drop on sweet orange and those from key lime anthracnose form two separate populations regardless of their country of origin.
The situation with citrus presents an interesting opportunity to study the evolution of pathogenicity and the movement of pathogens between hosts and countries. Postbloom fruit drop is of relatively recent origin. The disease and its causal agent were first described in Belize in 1979. However, there are informal reports and letters from the late 1950s and the 1960s describing symptoms on citrus in Belize and Colombia. Postbloom fruit symptoms are obvious and the effects on yield are dramatic; thus, it would be unlikely that the disease would have gone unnoticed for extended periods in commercial citrus groves. Reports of key lime anthracnose go back at least to the early 1900s. It was proposed originally that postbloom fruit drop may have originated when isolates from key lime anthracnose moved into other citrus species. The molecular data of Peres et al. are not inconsistent with that hypothesis, but if the populations of C. acutatum on key lime and other citrus species have common ancestors, they probably diverged some time ago. Indications are that postbloom fruit drop isolates were distributed to all of the citrus-growing areas of the Americas within 30 to 40 years, probably by movement of plant material bearing appressoria.
Symptoms caused by C. acutatum are primarily necroses, including blights on various types of host tissues such as leaves, petioles, flowers, fruit, or even roots on a wide range of hosts. However, the pathogen is not a general necrotroph attacking only young tissue or senescent tissues.
The affected plant tissues by C. acutatum across selected hosts include: young leaves and twigs, where symptoms may be rare; flowers, which commonly exhibit symptoms; and fruits, both preharvest and postharvest, with symptoms being more prevalent in certain cases. The roots and crowns typically show no symptoms in most cases. The variability in symptoms across different tissues reflects the pathogen's diverse impact on its host plants.
Rather, this pathogen is highly specialized regarding the tissue it attacks in each host. In some cases, one juvenile tissue may be attacked, while other tissues remain completely immune to infection. For example, the flowers of sweet orange are severely affected, but no symptoms appear on young leaves. With apples, the fruit is affected, but there are no symptoms on leaves. The fungus is probably best considered a hemibiotroph in the broad sense, as it has biotrophic and necrotrophic phases depending on the host and the tissue infected in any specific host.
C. acutatum infects susceptible cultivars of almond as a general necrotroph of young tissues, including leaves, twigs, flowers, and fruit. Thus, when rain occurs during warm weather, newly developing shoots and flowers may be severely blighted. A similar situation occurs with key lime, where all shoots and leaves may be killed by the pathogen. In both cases, destructive and disfiguring lesions are produced on fruit. Interestingly, all young tissues of key lime are susceptible and severely attacked by C. acutatum. However, on sweet orange and most other citrus crops, including Tahiti lime, only flower tissues are infected, leading to postbloom fruit drop; vegetative tissues are immune. Isolates of C. acutatum from key lime produce all symptoms of postbloom fruit drop on sweet orange, but isolates from postbloom fruit drop-affected sweet orange produce minimal anthracnose damage on key lime. Postbloom fruit drop of citrus appears to be unique among diseases caused by C. acutatum, as symptoms are induced by plant hormones. Natural citrus fruit abscission typically occurs at the base of the peduncle, but in postbloom fruit drop, abscission happens at the base of the fruit, leaving persistent calyces and peduncles. Leaves around the infected inflorescences usually become small and disfigured. Genes encoding ethylene and jasmonic acid biosynthesis, along with indole-3-acetic acid regulation, were found to be highly induced by C. acutatum infection. Indole acetic acid levels increased by as much as 140-fold in infected petals compared to healthy controls.
On some hosts, such as apple and blueberry, C. acutatum is a preharvest problem in fruit production and also acts as a postharvest pathogen. On these plants, quiescent infections that occur prior to harvest begin to develop as the fruit ripens. Those infections then progress into ripe rot of blueberry and bitter rot of apple after harvest. Similarly, postharvest symptoms may occur with anthracnose diseases of peaches, almonds, and other stone fruits. There are many other examples of postharvest decays on tropical fruits such as avocado, mango, papaya, and guava that develop from quiescent infections occurring in the field.
C. acutatum produces a wide range of symptoms on various tissues of the strawberry plant. The pathogen is not a general necrotroph on all tissues of strawberry, but it is most important as a necrotroph causing serious fruit rot. Lesions on petioles are produced from quiescent infections after the plants are established. Later, flowers may be attacked, and ripe and unripe fruit develop symptoms normally referred to as black spot. Strawberry is unique in that roots and crowns can be infected by C. acutatum, causing severe stunting or even plant death. The source of inoculum for root infection is uncertain. Conidia or possibly appressoria on the upper parts of the plant may be washed down to the crown and roots during digging, washing, and transplanting, and mechanical damage and stress caused by these processes may facilitate root infection.
Many inoculation studies have been conducted with Colletotrichum spp., demonstrating that most isolates are relatively non-host-specific. However, relatively few studies have dealt with the host specificity of C. acutatum. Bernstein et al. inoculated nonwounded, detached ripe peach fruit with isolates of Colletotrichum spp. from a number of different hosts. They found that lesion size was not related to the source of the isolate. Freeman and Shabi inoculated detached nectarine, mango, avocado, almond, and apple fruit with conidial suspensions of isolates of C. acutatum from apple and peach. All isolates produced lesions on fruit, but it was necessary to wound the mango fruit to obtain infection. Peres et al. found that a C. acutatum isolate from strawberry produced lesions on wounded, detached fruit of avocado, guava, papaya, mango, and passion fruit, but not banana. Isolates from strawberry also produced lesions on wounded and nonwounded fruit of pear, peach, nectarine, and apple. Thus, it would appear that C. acutatum has a broad host range, at least among fruit crops, and is relatively nonspecific. Many of the above studies, however, were done in the laboratory using detached and wounded fruit. Movement of C. acutatum from one fruit crop to another under natural conditions has not been demonstrated, and molecular groups often seem to be host specific. Isolates from certain hosts do show at least some specificity. Pathogenicity of C. acutatum isolates from lupine, pine, tomato, and persimmon fruit was evaluated on pine and lupine seedlings. All isolates from pine were nonpathogenic or weakly pathogenic to lupine and vice versa. The fruit isolates were not pathogenic on either pine or lupine. In Israel, inoculation of isolates of C. acutatum from anemone and strawberry into each host resulted in typical anthracnose symptoms on both plant species. Molecular studies indicated that the isolates from the two hosts were similar and formed a single genetic subgroup. Isolates of C. acutatum were recovered from pepper, eggplant, tomato, bean, as well as from weeds of the genera Vicia and Conyza; however, disease symptoms occurred only on strawberry. C. acutatum isolates from tulip tree in Argentina were also pathogenic to strawberry fruit. Thus, strawberry isolates of C. acutatum can parasitize and cause disease on other hosts or, alternatively, survive on other crops and on weeds without producing symptoms.
Dispersal. Conidia of C. acutatum are usually produced in acervuli on host tissue and are typically rain-splash dispersed. On low-growing crops such as strawberry, conidia are spread over short distances, and the use of straw as a ground cover can greatly reduce dispersal of conidia. On tree crops, dispersal by wind-blown rain can occur over much greater distances. With repeated cycles of infection on sweet orange flowers, post-bloom fruit drop of citrus can spread over large areas in a single season. On citrus, environmental factors, amounts of inoculum, and other factors affecting the epidemiology of postbloom fruit drop have been used to develop models to predict disease and forecast the need for fungicide applications. There is no evidence that ascospores function in the dispersal of any disease caused by C. acutatum. Guerber and Correll found nine vegetative compatibility groups (VCGs) in a single orchard. However, Gonzalez and Sutton found only two VCGs in three North Carolina orchards and concluded that once isolates were established in an orchard, they persisted over time. Thus, additional studies are needed on the biology and population genetics of C. acutatum to elucidate the importance of the sexual stage in the overall life cycle.
Survival on agricultural crops. The role of epiphytic stages and quiescent infections on survival of the fungus is not clear with many diseases caused by C. acutatum. With postbloom fruit drop on citrus, appressoria on mature tissues are essential for the survival of the pathogen. Since flowers are the only susceptible tissue and they occur only seasonally, the fungus survives as appressoria and quiescent infections on mature leaves. When flowers appear, leachates from flowers induce germination of appressoria and the production of conidia that infect new flowers. With strawberries, C. acutatum is usually introduced into production fields from nurseries. Some plants may be symptomatic, but many times the pathogen is introduced on asymptomatic leaves or petioles, presumably as appressoria and quiescent infections. Whether quiescent infections develop into lesions or whether appressoria germinate to produce conidia is not clear. However, conidia of C. acutatum can produce several secondary conidia from each conidium deposited on the leaf surface. The numbers of conidia produced suggest that the fungus is reproducing by utilizing nutrients on the leaf surface rather than reserves from the original conidium. In these cases, it would appear that the fungus is growing as an epiphyte and not necessarily producing quiescent infections. On blueberries, recent studies suggest that flower buds become infected and produce quiescent infections during the summer and that the pathogen overwinters in those structures. On almonds, it appears that mummified fruit that remain on the tree throughout dormancy are the main source of conidia for infections in spring.
Survival on alternative hosts. The role of alternative hosts in the cycle of dis
Conyza spp. surrounding strawberry fields can survive for three months on tomato, pepper, and eggplant leaves. Thus, the pathogen may spread from strawberries to adjacent weeds and then reinfest new strawberry fields the following year. Molecular and vegetative compatibility studies indicated that isolates from weeds, anemone, and strawberry form a single population in Israel. Further studies demonstrated that C. acutatum initially failed to penetrate the tissues of pepper, eggplant, and tomato, but intercellular penetration occurred later, suggesting that the fungus can likely live as an endophyte on these hosts. Although C. acutatum isolates from tropical fruits cross-infect well under laboratory conditions, the extent of cross-infection in nature and the degree to which disease cycles on one crop depend on the ability of a given group of isolates to survive on a different crop is not known. It is suspected that this is uncommon in most situations. Despite severe anthracnose issues with key limes in western Mexico, postbloom fruit drop has never developed on oranges or Tahiti limes grown in the area. Both strawberries and citrus are cultivated in Central Florida, and there is no indication of cross-infection. Instead, molecular studies indicate that strawberry and citrus isolates differ considerably. Similarly, in California, genetically distinct populations were identified from adjacent almond and strawberry fields.
Regarding survival in the environment, C. acutatum appears to compete poorly as a saprophyte but can survive in soil and on inanimate surfaces for varying periods depending on conditions. Research found that mycelium in strawberry tissue survived in air-dried soil for at least seven weeks, even at temperatures up to 40°C, and in moist soil for seven weeks at 10 and 25°C. Conidia of C. acutatum survived for at least one year in air-dry soil; however, in soil at field capacity, conidia survived less than two weeks. At 11% soil moisture, the time required for 95% loss of viability was 70 to 75 days. C. acutatum could not be recovered from strawberry crowns naturally infected and buried in methyl-bromide fumigated or nontreated soil after five months. In Florida, C. acutatum could no longer be recovered from buried infected crowns after 56 days. Conidia from leatherleaf fern survived up to one year in dry soil in Florida. Survival was shorter in moist soil, with conidia maintaining viability for about 35 days in soils at 12 to 24% moisture. In leaf debris, the fungus remained viable after 56 days when soil moisture was 6% or less, but not at higher moisture levels. C. acutatum remained viable for at least 105 days when infected plants were buried in field plots, and conidia remained viable on fabric for 35 to 45 days. Thus, conidia of C. acutatum can survive for extended periods in debris or soil under dry conditions. However, the fungus is unable to compete or multiply on leaf debris or in soil under moist conditions where other organisms are active.
In terms of host-pathogen interactions, although C. acutatum usually produces necrotic symptoms on most hosts, the host-pathogen interaction appears to be more biotrophic than that of some other species such as C. gloeosporioides. C. acutatum survives and competes poorly as a saprophyte in most cases. Nevertheless, it has been isolated from many plant species and has not always been associated with disease. This species may colonize the surface of plant tissues as an epiphyte or endophyte under certain circumstances, on both hosts and non-hosts, without producing symptoms.
O’Connell et al. and Perfect et al. described two types of interactions between Colletotrichum spp. and their hosts: intercellular hemibiotrophy and subcuticular intramural necrotrophy. With C. acutatum, there are few studies on the cytology of the infection process and the nature of early biotrophic relationships or quiescent infections established between pathogen and host. However, based on studies with C. acutatum on specific hosts, four types of interactions or infection strategies can be described. Conidia germinate and form appressoria on the tissue surface and infection pegs that penetrate the cuticle. Internal light spots at the contact point between the appressorium and the tissue surfaces have been assumed to be the points of emergence of the infection peg. However, on strawberry leaves, Leandro et al. questioned whether appressorium formation was followed by quiescent infections and whether the internal light spots represented infection pegs or were just contact points between the appressorium and the host surface. In a detailed study, Diéguez-Uribeondo et al. determined that internal light spots in appressorium formation on almond leaves corresponded to penetration pores and were followed by the production of an infection peg and colonization of host cells.
The sequence and nature of the infection process, including the initial penetration phase that may be a biotrophic or quiescent relationship, and subsequent development of infection hyphae and colonization of the host varies and is not well understood in most cases. With citrus postbloom fruit drop, the infection strategy on leaves is presumably biotrophic. After the end of the bloom period, conidia germinate to form appressoria, and quiescent infections are established that are probably intracellular. The tissues where quiescent infections develop are never colonized, and necrotrophy does not occur on leaves; rather, conidia and secondary conidia are produced following germination of the appressorium on the surface. Still, on flower petals, the pathogen is a necrotroph. With all tissues of key lime and strawberries, the biotrophic phase is very short. The pathogen produces appressoria, penetrates the host, and forms a subcuticular intramural necrotrophic association almost immediately. Curry et al. considered this strategy a modification of necrotrophy rather than bio- or hemibiotrophy because the biotrophic phase is so short.
With blueberry and many fruit crops (e.g., peach, apple, and many tropical fruits), other interactions or infection strategies may be occurring. Interactions can be intracellular hemibiotrophy when infecting ripe fruit of susceptible cultivars or subcuticular intramural necrotrophy when infecting fruit of resistant cultivars. The hemibiotrophic interaction begins with appressorium formation on the fruit surface and continues with the establishment of quiescent infections with a relatively long biotrophic phase. When fruit ripens, necrotrophic inter- and intracellular colonization occurs, tissues are extensively invaded, and the fungus sporulates. On almond leaves and presumably fruit, a combination of hemibiotrophic and subcuticular intramural necrotrophic infections occurs that results in intra- and intercellular colonization. In this case, the colonization is biotrophic after fungal penetration and becomes necrotrophic during intercellular growth.
This is followed by inter- and intracellular colonization and death of the tissue. The mechanism for the shift from biotrophy to necrotrophy is not certain. However, Colletotrichum acutatum, as well as other species of Colletotrichum, produce ammonia, causing local pH increases during the shift to necrotrophy. In most host–pathogen interactions, the specific interaction at the cellular level is unknown and may be a combination of strategies as shown in the schematic drawings of different host–pathogen interactions and infection strategies of Colletotrichum acutatum.
The first type illustrates biotrophic growth of C. acutatum with secondary conidiation. In this process, conidia germinate to form appressoria and quiescent infections, with secondary conidia formed after germination of the appressorium, which predominantly follows a biotrophic disease cycle on citrus leaves. The second type depicts subcuticular, intramural necrotrophy, where hyphal development occurs within the periclinal and anticlinal walls of epidermal host cells, leading to swollen host cell walls and wider spacing, typically observed in the necrotrophic disease cycle on strawberry. The third type represents a hemibiotrophic interaction, characterized by an infection vesicle and broad primary hyphae within the host cell, showcasing inter- and intracellular secondary hyphal growth, which illustrates the subsequent necrotrophic phase, primarily seen in blueberries. The final type involves hemibiotrophic and subcuticular, intra- and intercellular development of C. acutatum on almond, reflecting a combination of biotrophy and necrotrophy, but is mostly necrotrophic, particularly on almond leaves and fruit. Key elements are indicated: Cn for conidium, Gt for germ tube, Ap for appressorium, Iv for infection vesicle, Ph for primary hyphae, Sh for secondary hyphae, and Sc for secondary conidium. Dead host cells are marked with diagonal lines.
Furthermore, these strategies may depend on host tissues. For example, on almond and most cases on citrus, petal tissues of flowers are infected and colonized without forming appressoria, and no biotrophic phase is observed. Generally, these infection strategies lead to the different lifestyles proposed below.
The disease cycles of C. acutatum from different hosts often share common attributes. All produce acervuli with abundant conidia on one or more host tissues, and conidia are splash-dispersed, serving as the source of inoculum for most infections. Conidia may survive in a gelatinous matrix for some time if conditions are suitable. However, more typically, conidia germinate to produce appressoria and quiescent infections. The tissue on which sporulation and reproduction occur varies among hosts, and the fate of appressoria and quiescent infections also differs greatly. As far as is known, the sexual stage plays only a minor role in the life cycle of C. acutatum.
Although the pathogen exhibits overlapping survival strategies, the different disease cycles of C. acutatum can be grouped according to four general lifestyles: the leaf biotrophic–flower necrotrophic lifestyle observed in citrus is unique.
The fungus functions as a necrotroph on flowers and as a biotroph on leaves. Thus, the fungus reproduces primarily on flower petals and does not readily colonize and form acervuli on other tissues. Acervuli only form on other tissues when the tissue is killed under artificial conditions, and the fungus does not reproduce in the absence of flowers. Survival of the fungus during nonflowering periods occurs by means of appressoria that form on the surface of leaves, twigs, and the persistent calyces formed as a result of flower infection. The quiescent infections do not develop and result in colonization of the leaf or other vegetative tissues, and normally the pathogen cannot be isolated from leaves. Appressoria can be stimulated to germinate and produce a few conidia artificially by the application of petal extracts. It is presumed that in nature, petals falling on moist leaves result in stimulation of germination of appressoria on the surface, and that the few secondary conidia produced are splash dispersed to the new flowers. Thus, C. acutatum behaves as a necrotroph on citrus during the flowering period and produces severe epidemics at that stage. However, for much of the year, the fungus lives biotrophically in quiescent infections on vegetative structures.
C. acutatum is primarily a necrotroph on strawberry tissues. It affects flower, fruit, leaf, and petiole tissue, and also produces root necrosis, which is highly unusual for this fungus. Roots of transplants are presumably contaminated during digging, trimming, and packing operations in the nursery. Thus, roots might not normally be infected when the crop is grown as a perennial. The management of strawberry as a crop affects the cycle of the pathogen. The plant is a perennial, but as a cultivated plant, it is treated as an annual. Transplants are often produced far from commercial fields; thus, the fungus must survive as symptomatic or quiescent infections on transplants that will serve as inoculum for the commercial fields. The biotrophic phase is usually very short, but infected leaves, petioles, and runners may not show symptoms for some time. Secondary conidiation can occur on the surface of vegetative tissues, and this can serve to augment inoculum levels to infect flowers and fruit. These few conidia formed on the foliage without causing symptoms are dispersed by splashing water and harvesting operations from the foliage to flowers and fruit. Primary inoculum for dispersal within the field is mostly dependent on the formation of spores in acervuli on petioles and fruit tissues.
Fruit hemibiotrophic lifestyle (blueberry–apple–stone fruit). Fruit decays represent a common lifestyle of Colletotrichum acutatum for diseases such as blueberry ripe rot, apple bitter rot, anthracnose of peach, and likely numerous anthracnose diseases of subtropical and tropical fruits. In the cases of bitter rot of apple and ripe rot of blueberry, acervuli are produced abundantly on mature fruit. Conidia from acervuli are splash-dispersed, germinate to form appressoria, and establish quiescent infections on fruit, as demonstrated on peaches. These diseases occur both in the field and after harvest; however, most quiescent infections develop during the growing season. In blueberries, C. acutatum is also known to attack young leaves and other tissues, although this is rare. Thus, conidia from acervuli on leaves and decaying fruit could serve as a source of inoculum for other fruit, and the pathogen survives as appressoria in bud scales and dead fruiting twigs. With apples, the source of inoculum is less clear since C. acutatum primarily causes disease on fruit. It appears to be widespread in orchards and is readily isolated from both healthy and damaged tissue. In Michigan, where bitter rot rarely occurs, C. acutatum is still prevalent in apple orchards and commonly isolated. It seems to survive and reproduce as an epiphyte or endophyte in such situations, similar to the epiphytic–short necrotroph lifestyle.
Biotroph–necrotroph combination lifestyle (almond–key lime). There are numerous diseases where C. acutatum primarily functions as a necrotroph but can also act as a biotroph, indicating a combination of biotrophic and necrotrophic interactions. This lifestyle includes anthracnose of almond, key lime, and leatherleaf fern. In these instances, acervuli and conidia are produced abundantly on the affected tissues. Conidia are splash-dispersed to healthy tissues, which become infected quickly. The fungus can survive as dried conidia in acervuli or mycelia in dead tissues, including spurs and mummified almond fruit. Once new growth develops, conidia from acervuli can initiate a new epidemic. Conidia may also be dispersed to mature tissues that are not susceptible to infection, allowing quiescent infections to develop and result in colonization of leaf tissue.
Almost all reports of the natural recovery of C. acutatum have been from agricultural hosts.
However, recent reports indicate that C. acutatum may inhabit a number of unexplored niches. For example, C. acutatum has been recovered from an immune-compromised sea turtle. Additionally, a single isolate of C. acutatum was found apparently colonizing the leaves of a tree species in a native forest. Whether such isolates originated from agricultural ecosystems or could represent a source of such pathogens remains largely unexplored.
Concluding Remarks
Considerable progress has been made in recent years in delineating anthracnose diseases and their causal agents. Molecular tools have been effectively utilized to distinguish Colletotrichum species, clearly separating C. acutatum from C. gloeosporioides and identifying genetically distinct subgroups within C. acutatum. However, the disease cycles of C. acutatum in many host–pathogen systems still remain poorly understood, even in economically important crops. This pathogen has the ability to reproduce on many different types of tissues across various hosts and can exist as a necrotroph, biotroph, endophyte, or epiphyte, depending on the plant species and tissue involved. The affected tissues are also very specific for each host combination, and the pathogen develops a highly specialized relationship at the cellular level, which is reflected in the disease cycle for each host case. The biotrophic and epiphytic phases of the pathogen, along with the means of reproduction of C. acutatum in the absence of pathogenesis, require further investigation. Tissue specificity and life cycles of C. acutatum are likely under genetic control, and it may be possible to induce mutants that are no longer pathogenic to certain hosts or tissues, determining the genetic basis for tissue or host specificity as has been done with other species of Colletotrichum.
Few investigations of cross-pathogenicity and the host range of C. acutatum isolates in nature have been conducted. If this pathogen indeed has a broad host range and can move readily between hosts, it is intriguing that it has developed unique relationships with each plant species. Many investigators have limited crop responsibilities, lack facilities to handle temperate or tropical crops, or are restricted in the isolates they can study due to biosecurity regulations. Consequently, these factors have constrained studies of host ranges involving large numbers of isolates. With ingenuity and cooperative efforts, at least some of these studies can be conducted, leading to a better understanding of the movement and host specificity of C. acutatum and determining where restrictions on the movement of plant materials are warranted.
J. 1992. Morphological and pathological characteristics of strains of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides from citrus. Phytopathology 82:1377-1382.
Alahakoon, P. W., Brown, A. E., and Sreenivasaprasad, S. 1994. Cross infection potential of genetic groups of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides on tropical fruits. Physiol. Mol. Plant Pathol. 44:93-103.
Arauz, L. F. 2000. Mango anthracnose: Economic impact and current options for integrated management. Plant Dis. 84:600-611.
Arx, J. A. von. 1970. A revision of the fungi classified as Gloeosporium. Biol. Mycol. 24:1-203.
Baxter, A. P., van der Westhuizen, G. C. A., and Eicker, A. 1983. Morphology and taxonomy of South African isolates of Colletotrichum. S. Afr. J. Bot. 2:259-289.
Bernstein, B., Zehr, E. I., Dean, R. A., and Shabi, E. 1995. Characteristics of Colletotrichum from peach, apple, pecan, and other hosts. Plant Dis. 79:478-482.
Bonde, M. R., Peterson, G. L., and Maas, J. L. 1991. Isozyme comparisons for identification of Colletotrichum species pathogenic to strawberry. Phytopathology 81:1523-1528.
Brown, A. E., and Soepena, H. 1994. Pathogenicity of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. gloeosporioides on leaves of Hevea spp. Mycol. Res. 98:264-266.
Brown, A. E., Sreenivasaprasad, S., and Timmer, L. W. 1996. Molecular characterization of slow-growing orange and key lime anthracnose strains of Colletotrichum from citrus as C. acutatum. Phytopathology 86:523-527.
Correll, J. C., Guerber, J. C., Wasilwa, L. A., Sherill, J. F., and Morelock, T. E. 2000. Inter- and intra-species variation in Colletotrichum and mechanisms which affect population structure. Pages 146-179 in: Colletotrichum: Host Specificity, Pathogenicity, and Host-Pathogen Interactions. D. Prusky, S. Freeman, and M. B. Dickman, eds. American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN.
Curry, K. J., Abril, M., Avant, J. B., and Smith, B. J. 2002. Strawberry anthracnose: Histopathology of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. fragariae. Phytopathology 92:1055-1063.
DeMarsay, A., and Oudemans, P. V. 2003. Colletotrichum acutatum infections in dormant highbush blueberry buds. (Abstr.) Phytopathology 93
.
DeMarsay, A., and Oudemans, P. V. 2004. Blueberry anthracnose: From bud infection to fruit rot. (Abstr.) Phytopathology 94
.
Denoyes-Rothan, B., Guérin, G., Délye, C., Smith, B., Minz, D., Maymon, M., and Freeman, S. 2003. Genetic diversity and pathogenic variability among isolates of Colletotrichum species from strawberry. Phytopathology 93:219-228.
Diéguez-Uribeondo, J., Förster, H., and Adaskaveg, J. E. 2003. Digital image analysis of internal light spots of appressoria of Colletotrichum acutatum. Phytopathology
P. Timmer, L. W., and Chung, K. R. 2004. Induction of phytohormones and differential gene expression in citrus flowers infected by the fungus Colletotrichum acutatum. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 17:1394-1401.
Lardner, R., Johnston, P. R., Plummer, K. M., and Pearson, M. N. 1999. Morphological and molecular analysis of Colletotrichum acutatum sensu lato. Mycol. Res. 103:275-285.
Leandro, L. F. S., Gleason, M. L., Nutter, F. W., Jr., Wegulo, S. N., and Dixon, P. M. 2001. Germination and sporulation of Colletotrichum acutatum on symptomless strawberry leaves. Phytopathology 91:659-664.
Leandro, L. F. S., Gleason, M. L., Nutter, F. W., Jr., Wegulo, S. N., and Dixon, P. M. 2003. Influence of temperature and wetness duration on conidia and appressoria of Colletotrichum acutatum on symptomless strawberry leaves. Phytopathology 93:513-520.
Leandro, L. F. S., Gleason, M. L., Nutter, F. W., Jr., Wegulo, S. N., and Dixon, P. M. 2004. Strawberry plant extracts stimulate secondary conidiation by Colletotrichum acutatum on symptomless leaves. Phytopathology 93:1285-1291.
Legard, D. 2000. Colletotrichum diseases of strawberries in Florida. Pages 292-299 in: Host Specificity, Pathology, and Host-Pathogen Interactions of Colletotrichum. D. Prusky, S. Freeman, and M. B. Dickman, eds. American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN.
Li, W., Yuan, R., Burns, J. K., Timmer, L. W., and Chung, K. R. 2003. Genes for hormone biosynthesis and regulation are highly expressed in citrus flowers infected with the fungus Colletotrichum acutatum, the causal agent of postbloom fruit drop. J. Am. Soc. Hortic. Sci. 128:578-583.
Lori, G. A., Alippi, A. M., and Dimenna, S. 2004. First report of species of Colletotrichum causing leaf blotch of Liriodendron tulipifera in Argentina. Plant Dis. 88:1381.
Lu, G., Cannon, P. F., Reid, A., and Simmons, C. M. 2004. Diversity and molecular relationships of endophytic Colletotrichum isolates from the Iwokrama Forest Reserve, Guyana. Mycol. Res. 108:53-63.
Maas, J. L., and Howard, C. M. 1985. Variation of several anthracnose fungi in virulence to strawberry and apple. Plant Dis. 69:164-166.
Madden, L. V., Wilson, L. L., and Ellis, M. A. 1993. Field spread of anthracnose fruit rot of strawberry in relation to ground cover and ambient weather conditions. Plant Dis. 77:
N. L. and Timmer, L. W. 2002. A fungicide application decision support system for postbloom fruit drop of citrus. Plant Health Progress.
Peres, N. A. R., Kuramae, E. E., Dias, M. S. C., and de Souza, N. L. 2002. Identification of Colletotrichum spp. affecting fruit after harvest in Brazil. J. Phytopathol. 150:128-134.
Peres, N. A. R., Peever, T. L., Chung, K.-R., and Timmer, L. W. 2003. Molecular characterization of isolates of Colletotrichum acutatum causing postbloom fruit drop of citrus and Key lime anthracnose in the Americas. Page 346 in: Proc. Congr. Plant Pathol. 8th, Christchurch, New Zealand.
Peres, N. A. R., Souza, N. L., Peever, T. L., and Timmer, L. W. 2004. Benomyl sensitivity of isolates of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. gloeosporioides from citrus. Plant Dis. 88:125-130.
Perfect, S. E., Hughes, H. B., O’Connell, R. J., and Green, J. R. 1999. Colletotrichum: A model for studies on pathology and fungal plant interactions. Fungal Genet. Biol. 27:186-198.
Prusky, D., McEvoy, J. L., Leverentz, B., and Conway, W. S. 2001. Local modulation of host pH by Colletotrichum species as a mechanism to increase virulence. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 14:1105-1113.
Rodriguez, R. J., and Redman, R. S. 2000. Colletotrichum as a model system for defining the genetic basis of fungal symbiotic lifestyles. Pages 114-130 in: Host Specificity, Pathology, and Host-Pathogen Interactions of Colletotrichum. D. Prusky, S. Freeman, and M. B. Dickman, eds. American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN.
Saha, T., Kumar, A., Ravindran, M., Jacobs, K., Roy, B., and Nazeer, M. A. 2002. Identification of Colletotrichum acutatum from rubber using random amplified polymorphic DNAs and ribosomal DNA polymorphisms. Mycol. Res. 106:215-221.
Shi, Y. L., Correll, J. C., and Guerber, J. C. 1996. Frequency of Colletotrichum species causing bitter rot of apple in the southeastern United States. Plant Dis. 80:692-696.
Simmonds, J. H. 1965. A study of the species of Colletotrichum causing ripe fruit rots in Queensland. Qld. J. Agric. Sci. 22:437-459.
Simmonds, J. H. 1968. Type specimens of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides var. minor and Colletot
Zulfiqar, M. 1994. Postbloom fruit drop of citrus, an increasingly prevalent disease of citrus in the Americas. Plant Dis. 78:329-334. Timmer, L. W., and Brown, G. E. 2000. Biology and control of anthracnose diseases of citrus. Pages 300-316 in: Host Specificity, Pathology, and Host-Pathogen Interactions of Colletotrichum. D. Prusky, S. Freeman, and M. B. Dickman, eds. American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. Timmer, L. W., Brown, G. E., and Zitko, S. E. 1998. The role of Colletotrichum spp. in postharvest anthracnose of citrus and survival of C. acutatum on fruit. Plant Dis. 82:415-418. Timmer, L. W., and Zitko, S. E. 1996. Evaluation of a model for prediction of postbloom fruit drop of citrus. Plant Dis. 80:380-383. Ureña-Padilla, A. R., Mitchell, D. J., and Legard, D. E. 2001. Oversummer survival of inoculum for Colletotrichum crown rot in buried strawberry crown tissue. Plant Dis. 85:750-754. Vaillancourt, L., Du, M., Wang, J., Rollins, J., and Hanau, R. 2000. Genetic analysis of cross fertility between two self-sterile strains of Glomerella graminicola. Mycologia 92:430-435. Van der Aa, H. A., Noordeloos, M. E., and De Gruyter, J. 1990. Species concepts in some larger genera of the Coelomycetes. Stud. Mycol. 32:3-19. Wharton, P. S., and Diéguez-Uribeondo, J. 2004. The biology of Colletotrichum acutatum. Ann. Jardín Bot. Madrid 61:3-22. Zaitlin, B., Zehr, E. I., and Dean, R. A. 2000. Latent infection of peach caused by Colletotrichum gloeosporioides and Colletotrichum acutatum. Can. J. Plant Pathol. 22:224-228. Zulfiqar, M., Brlansky, R. H., and Timmer, L. W. 1996. Infection of flower and vegetative tissues of citrus by Colletotrichum acutatum and C. gloeosporioides. Mycologia 88:121-128.
Dr. Peres is an assistant professor of plant pathology at the University of Florida, Gulf Coast Research and Education Center in Wimauma. She received her B.S. in agronomy in 1995, an M.S. in horticulture in 1998, and a Ph.D. in plant pathology in 2002 at São Paulo State University in Botucatu, São Paulo, Brazil. Her dissertation work involved the biology and management of postbloom fruit drop of citrus caused by Colletotrichum acutatum. After receiving her Ph.D., she worked as program manager for a project on foliar fungal diseases of citrus at the Insti
Dr. Adaskaveg is an associate professor of plant pathology at the University of California, Riverside. He received a B.S. degree in agronomy in 1982 from the University of Connecticut, Storrs, and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in plant pathology from the University of Arizona, Tucson, in 1984 and 1986, respectively. He was a postdoctoral research associate and a research plant pathologist at the University of California, Davis, until 1995. Dr. Adaskaveg currently leads a diverse research program on the biology, ecology, epidemiology, and management of pre- and postharvest fungal diseases of tree fruit and nut crops in California. Part of his research focuses on anthracnose diseases of citrus, almond, and peach. Recent studies have provided new information on the ultrastructure of host–pathogen relationships, pathogen biology, epidemiology of anthracnose, and molecular techniques for the detection and identification of Colletotrichum species and other fungi.
Dr. Correll is a professor of plant pathology at the University of Arkansas in Fayetteville. He received his B.S. from Pennsylvania State University and his M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of California at Berkeley. From 1986 to 1989, he was a postdoctoral fellow at Kansas State University and the University of California, Berkeley, and he joined the faculty at the University of Arkansas in 1989. His current research program focuses on basic research in the population genetics of fungi such as Pyricularia, Colletotrichum, and Fusarium. He also has a large program dealing with the management of diseases of vegetables and rice using cultivar resistance, cultural practices, and chemical and nonchemical methods. He has many international research projects, especially in Asia and Africa, and travels extensively. Dr. Correll has been active in the American Phytopathological Society (APS) and has served terms as associate and senior editor of Plant Disease, associate editor of Phytopathology, and is currently the senior editor of Phytopathology. He has been an invited speaker at many APS symposia and has also been active in the Mycological Society of America.
Natalia A. Peres, L. W. “Pete” Timmer, J. E. Adaskaveg, J. C. Correll
