Microsoft Word - 50-01a MycoBank-FINALP&W.doc
STUDIES IN MYCOLOGY 50: 19–22. 2004.
19
MycoBank: an online initiative to launch mycology into the 21st century
Pedro W. Crous*, Walter Gams, Joost A. Stalpers, Vincent Robert, and Gerrit Stegehuis
Centraalbureau voor Schimmelcultures, P.O. Box 85167, 3508 AD Utrecht, The Netherlands
*Correspondence: Pedro W. Crous, crous@cbs.knaw.nl
Abstract:
An online database, MycoBank, is launched with the goal of documenting mycological nomenclatural novelties and their associated descriptions and illustrations. Each nomenclatural novelty will be assigned a unique accession number that can be cited in the publication where the novelty is introduced. These accession numbers will also be incorporated into Life Science Identifiers (LSIDs) allocated by the nomenclatural database Index Fungorum, with which MycoBank is associated. Nomenclatural experts will review the validity, legitimacy, and linguistic accuracy of proposed names. Nomenclatural errors will be detected before publication, but no censorship (nomenclatural or taxonomic) will be imposed by MycoBank. MycoBank will provide links to other databases when applicable, including those containing living cultures, DNA data, reference specimens, and pleomorphic names linked to the same holomorph. Names will remain confidential until after publication, after which they will be accessible through MycoBank, Index Fungorum, GBIF, and other international biodiversity initiatives. These names will be further linked to other databases to create a species bank that eventually connects all life databases. Authors intending to publish nomenclatural novelties are encouraged to contribute to this initiative.
Key words: fungal systematics, Index Fungorum, Index of Fungi, International Code of Botanical Nomenclature, MycoBank, mycology, online database.
Names of organisms are essential for information, and access to accurate and complete information significantly impacts areas such as agriculture (phytopathology, epidemiology) and pharmaceuticals (ethnobiology), as well as the scientific community as a whole. The naming of fungi is governed by the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (ICBN; Greuter et al. 2000a), which dictates the effective and valid publication of a name. Unlike bacterial names, which must be published in or listed by the International Journal of Systematic Bacteriology (IJSB) or the International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology (IJSEM), the ICBN does not impose restrictions on the types of journals, books, or other publications where new fungal names can be published. This broad range of acceptable publication outlets makes it difficult to track newly named taxa or existi
The main aim of this proposed system was to obtain a mechanism that would help solve problems encountered in determining which names are effectively published (Art. 29.1) and when (Art. 32.1). Proposals made by a committee for registration, formulated by Faegri (1991), were not approved at the meeting of the nomenclatural section preceding the Tokyo Botanical Congress (Greuter et al. 1994b, pp. 138–156, 168–169). However, a sentence forecasting such a procedure was included in the Tokyo Code (Greuter et al. 1994a: Art. 32.1, last sentence). Following publication of fervent objections (Turland & Davidse 1998, Eggli 1998) and the failure of the proposals concerning registration in the mail vote, they were withdrawn during the meeting of the Nomenclatural Section preceding the St. Louis Congress (Barrie & Greuter 1999). During that meeting, a motion from the floor (Greuter et al. 2000b, pp. 160–165) resulted in the clauses concerned with registration being removed from the Code (Greuter et al. 2000a).
Presently, the biological community benefits greatly from central institutions that generate indexes, such as the Index of Fungi, a biannual publication of new fungal names compiled by CABI Bioscience, UK, and published by CABI Publishing. This index intends to cover all nomenclatural novelties published for fungi (both extant and extinct) and is an indispensable source of information, with the content assessed for validity, legitimacy, and orthography. Another related initiative is the online database Index Fungorum, maintained by the Index Fungorum Partnership (CABI Bioscience, UK; the Centraalbureau voor Schimmelcultures, the Netherlands; and Landcare Research, New Zealand).
In recent years, other databases, such as those for DNA sequences (GenBank, EMBL, etc.), have grown almost automatically, with spontaneous online input from individual contributors. After minimal screening of their submissions, contributors receive an accession number for each deposited sequence, which is almost invariably cited in ensuing publications, a requirement imposed by many scientific journals. These sequence banks have become indispensable sources of information and have gained worldwide appreciation. A similar procedure to record fungal nomenclatural novelties (MycoBank) was recently proposed by Crous et al. (2004).
A two-step procedure was proposed. (1) At the time a paper is editorially accepted by a journal (or book editor/publisher), the author submits the relevant protologue (Latin diagnosis, a description in another language, illustrations—optional but recommended—and typification, or proposed recombinations with basionyms and indication of types) electronically to MycoBank. The proposed name(s) are to be screened for validity, legitimacy, and orthography and placed in the online database; however, access to unpublished names is initially to be restricted to maintain confidentiality.
Each nomenclatural novelty will receive a unique accession number, analogous to a GenBank accession number issued for each sequence submitted. This number would be communicated to the author and cited in the final version of the paper. In cases where the proposed names do not fulfill the requirements of the Code, the author would be informed and invited to make corrections. Immediately after effective publication, the author(s) must communicate the exact date and bibliographic details to MycoBank to lift the restrictions in the database put in place at accession, making all information (name, text, and illustrations) freely accessible. Direct communication of nomenclatural novelties to MycoBank by publishing journals at the moment of publication would, of course, speed up the procedure.
Here, "organisms studied by mycologists" is interpreted in a traditional way (Kirk et al. 2001). The responsibility for submitting details of proposed nomenclatural novelties rests with the author(s), but this process is envisioned as a practice imposed by high-quality journals as part of good editorial standards, similar to the accepted practice of incorporating GenBank accession numbers. This could become a mandatory requirement if the ICBN were to be modified. The date for priority purposes will remain, as it is at present, the date of effective publication, provided the name complies with all requirements for valid publication. Although this procedure requires some extra activities from the author(s) of nomenclatural novelties, it will not be more cumbersome than the submission of DNA sequences to GenBank, which is an accepted practice, and it offers substantial advantages. For instance, MycoBank can advise the author(s) of deficiencies in the submission before publication to ensure effective and valid publication. However, regardless of the author(s)' decisions, no censorship will be exerted by MycoBank. The indexing center will then focus its efforts elsewhere in maintaining the currency, completeness, and integrity of the database. The biological community will gain immediate post-publication access to all nomenclatural novelties online.
The nomenclatural database will remain as Index Fungorum, while the additional data linked to these names will be available via MycoBank. Nomenclatural novelties can thus easily be linked to other databases (GenBank, culture collection databases, reference collections such as "herbaria," e-journals, and pleomorphic life form databases). MycoBank will be a freely available database, but its success will wholly rely on collaboration among scientists and journal editors who insist on the use of MycoBank accession numbers as part of their publication policies and quality control. This collaboration envisions an eventual species bank that links all related ecological, molecular, metabolite, publication, and other data with the species, its distribution, and biological associations (e.g., as parasites or mycorrhizal partners). MycoBank will thus form an essential and fundamental digital link to information on fungi.
As names and associated data are entered into MycoBank, LSIDs will subsequently be available from Index Fungorum and will be associated with the basic nomenclatural data. Names entering Index Fungorum via the quarterly updates from the Index of Fungi will also receive associated LSIDs, though they will only appear in Index Fungorum. It will be the responsibility of authors to submit names with accompanying data to MycoBank. The Index Fungorum Partnership has a Memorandum of Cooperation with GBIF to supply nomenclatural data to the ECAT, ensuring that all names and associated LSIDs will also be available.
MYCOBANK 21 through the GBIF portal, where they will be further linked with other databases. Fig. 1. Aspergillus westerdijkiae. MycoBank accession number MB500000 (Frisvad et al. 2004). Participants of the Eleventh International Congress on Yeasts (15–20 August 2004, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil) welcomed this initiative and decided to support it. Yeast researchers will be able to include their new species descriptions online. This will include all morphological, physiological, and molecular data. Pictures, textual descriptions, bibliographical references, and relevant internet links will also be made available. The research community will thus have free access to an online polyphasic and constantly updated database. In this special centennial issue of Studies in Mycology, which appears in celebration of the centenary of the Centraalbureau voor Schimmelcultures, more than 100 new species are being described to celebrate the 100 years of existence of the Fungal Biodiversity Centre CBS. In view of this special occasion, we take the opportunity to launch MycoBank. The first nomenclatural novelty in this volume, Aspergillus westerdijkiae (Fig. 1), will be allocated the MycoBank accession number MB500000. The name and associated nomenclatural data will then be permanently linked to this number, which will subsequently be associated with the LSID urn:lsid
.org:names:500000. Henceforth, we encourage authors and journal editors to follow this lead and deposit their novelties at MycoBank.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors are grateful to Drs. Paul F. Cannon, Paul M. Kirk, John C. David (CABI Bioscience, U.K.), and Dagmar Triebel (Botanische Staatssammlung München, Germany), for their constructive comments on this script.
REFERENCES
Barrie FR, Greuter W (1999). XVI International Botanical Congress: preliminary mail vote and report of Congress action on nomenclature proposals. Taxon 48: 771–784.
Borgen L, Greuter W, Hawksworth DL, Nicolson DH, Zimmer B (1997). Announcing a test and trial phase for the registration of new plant names (1998–1999). Taxon 46: 811–814.
Brummitt RK, Hawksworth DL, McNeill J (1986). Proposals for a method of defining effective publication by means of approved publications. Taxon 35: 823–826.
Crous PW, Gams W, Stalpers JA, Cannon PF, Kirk PM, David JC, Triebel D (2004). An online database of names and descriptions as an alternative to registration. Mycological Research 108: 1236–1238.
Eggli U (1998). Why we don’t need registration. Taxon 47: 963–965.
Faegri K (1991). Proposals on registration of new names and combinations, and report of Special Committee 4. Taxon 40: 681–683.
Frisvad JC, Frank JM, Houbraken JAMP, Kuijpers AFA, Samson RA (2004). New ochratoxin producing species of Aspergillus section Circumdati. Studies in Mycology 50: 23–43.
Greuter W, Barrie FR, Burdet HM, Chaloner WG, Demoulin V, Hawksworth DL, Jørgensen PM, Nicolson DH, Silva PC, Trehane P, McNeill J. (1994). International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (Tokyo Code). Regnum Vegetabile 131, Koeltz, Königstein.
Greuter W, Hawksworth DL (1999). Synopsis of Proposals on Botanical Nomenclature - St Louis 1999. Taxon 48: 69–128.
Greuter W, McNeill J, Barrie F
Understood! Please go ahead and share the contents when you're ready.
