Cross-infection potential has been reported among different species of Colletotrichum and genotypes of C. gloeosporioides on a variety of tropical, subtropical, and temperate fruit under artificial inoculation conditions. To determine the potential of cross-infection in Colletotrichum spp., isolates from different crops were cross-inoculated on various hosts. In such experiments, isolates of C. acutatum and C. gloeosporioides from a variety of temperate fruit caused disease symptoms that were visually indistinguishable when inoculated on detached peach fruit. Likewise, in artificial inoculations of strawberry plants, C. trifolii isolates were either avirulent to moderately virulent on stolons, whereas one isolate of C. coccodes and additional isolates of C. gloeosporioides and G. cingulata were as virulent as C. fragariae on stolons. It was shown that C. gloeosporioides isolates from almond, apple, avocado, and mango, as well as C. acutatum isolates from anemone, apple, and peach, infected detached fruit including apple (two cultivars), avocado, almond, mango, and nectarine. These results demonstrated cross-infection potential with two species, C. gloeosporioides (including representatives of distinct subpopulations from almond, apple, avocado, and mango) and C. acutatum (from apple and peach), on several fruit species. C. acutatum is a known pathogen of the ornamental anemone causing leaf-curl disease. In cross-inoculation experiments of anemone and strawberry, regardless of isolate source (anemone or strawberry), all anemone plants were killed within 14 days of inoculation, and typical anthracnose symptoms were observed on strawberry plants artificially inoculated with isolates from both hosts, resulting in eventual mortality of plants. Numerous reports have indicated that strawberry anthracnose pathogens may originate from weed species. For example, C. fragariae was found attacking the weed Cassia obtusifolia L. (sicklepod, coffeweed) in Florida, causing typical disease symptoms. Furthermore, inoculation of strawberry with the Cassia isolates caused typical anthracnose symptoms, whereas isolates originating from strawberry were equally virulent on Cassia. Similarly, inoculation of Duchesnea indica (Andr.) Focke (wild strawberry), F. virginiana Duch. (Virginia wild strawberry), and Potentilla canadensis L. with C. fragariae caused anthracnose disease on these hosts, indicating that strawberry anthracnose pathogens may have a wide host range. Traditional methods may not be accurate enough for differentiating between species and subspecies of Colletotrichum; therefore, a number of molecular methods have been used to characterize populations of Colletotrichum. Arbitrarily primed polymerase chain reaction (ap-PCR) and limited restriction digest analyses of PCR-amplified ribosomal DNA (rDNA) were employed to differentiate between representative isolates of C. gloeosporioides and C. acutatum from a diverse host range, including strawberry. Species-specific primers have been designed primarily according to dissimilarities in the sequence of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions of representative isolates of Colletotrichum from different species and have subsequently been used to differentiate between C. acutatum and C. gloeosporioides from a broad host range and to detect latent infections in planta.
In view of the fact that in Israel, strawberry is cultivated adjacent to crops such as tomato, eggplant, pepper, and other vegetables, and that various weed species persist in the vicinity of strawberry, the potential for cross-inoculation was deemed of extreme importance. Furthermore, we found that an identical genotype of C. acutatum was recovered from natural field infections of both strawberry and anemone in Israel. Therefore, the main objectives of this work were to assess the persistence and interactions of C. acutatum on the main host, strawberry, and other plant species that may serve as potential inoculum sources for this pathogen under appropriate conditions.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Fungal cultures and growth conditions. The monoconidial Colletotrichum cultures used in this study included Israeli isolates of C. acutatum (TUT-79, -110, -137, -149, and -5954) and C. gloeosporioides (CG-314) from strawberry, Vicia spp. (V-1, V-2, V-3, and V-4), and Conyza spp. (isolated by the authors); a U.S. isolate of C. gloeosporioides from strawberry (CG 272), and an Israeli isolate of C. gloeosporioides from Limonium spp. (L-12, isolated by the authors). The Vicia and Conyza isolates originated from plants growing in a strawberry fruiting field in Israel infected with C. acutatum. All fungi were cultured in the dark on modified Mathur’s medium (MS; 0.1% yeast extract, 0.1% bactopeptone, 1% sucrose, 0.25% MgSO4·7H2O, 0.27% KH2PO4, 2% agar), supplemented for semiselective isolation of Colletotrichum with 2.5 µg (a.i.) of iprodione, 0.1% lactic acid, and 25 mg of ampicillin in 1 liter of sterile distilled water.
Plant and fruit inoculation procedures. Plants used in this study included strawberry (cv. Malach), tomato (Lycopersicum esculantum Mill., cv. 149), eggplant (Solanum melongena L. var. esculentum Nees, cv. Classic), pepper (Capsicum annum L., cv. Maccabi), garden bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L., cv. Hilda), vetch (Vicia spp.), and horseweed (Conyza spp.). Seedlings of all cultivated plants were received from Hishtil Nursery, Nahsholim, Israel. Plants in inoculation experiments were grown in pots (0.5-liter volume) in peat-vermiculite medium (vol/vol; 1:1), watered twice daily by overhead or drip irrigation (depending on the experimental design), and maintained in a greenhouse at 25°C. The plants were artificially inoculated by spraying with a mixture of the C. acutatum isolates (TUT-79, -110, -137, -149, and -5954) at a concentration of 5 × 10^6 conidia/ml until runoff, and maintained under 100% relative humidity by covering with plastic bags for 72 hours. Leaves were sampled for assessment of survival and colonization at different time points starting immediately after spraying and continuing until the termination of the experiment. Pathogenicity assays of the Vicia (V-1, V-2, V-3, and V-4) and Conyza (CONYZA) C. acutatum isolates on strawberry and the respective weed species were performed separately for each individual isolate.
The fruit used in this study included apple (Malus domestica Borkh., cvs. Granny Smith, Golden Delicious, and Starking), pear (Pyrus communis L., cv. Spadona), peach (Prunus persica L., cv. Hermosa), and nectarine (P. persica L. Batsch var. nectarina, cv. Flamekiss), which were purchased at the local supermarket. Fruit were thoroughly washed with detergent to remove possible remnants of post-harvest applied chemicals. The strawberry fruit (cv. Tamar) were obtained from untreated greenhouse plants at the Agricultural Research Organization. The various fruit were surface sterilized by submerging in 3% sodium hypochlorite.
Rehovot, Israel, for 2 minutes, washed extensively with sterile water, dried in a laminar flow hood, and either non-wound inoculated or wound inoculated by pinpricking. In vitro experiments were conducted to verify that surface sterilization killed all conidia and non-germinated melanized appressoria. For this purpose, conidia were germinated for 0 to 96 hours until melanized appressoria were formed on a sterile petri dish containing a thin layer of liquid MS medium. Thereafter, the plates were surface sterilized as described, and no mycelial growth or fungal development was detected after pouring warm, solid MS medium into the plates. This experiment was repeated several times. In no case was there any recovery of the fungus, showing that surface sterilization eradicated 100% of fungal propagules (conidia, mycelium, and melanized appressoria) on the plastic as well as on leaf surfaces. Strawberry fruit were not surface sterilized before inoculation. Inoculation was performed by pipetting a 5-µl droplet of a conidial suspension (5 × 10^6 conidia/ml) of a mixed culture of the C. acutatum isolates (TUT-79, -110, -137, -149, and -5954) from strawberry, C. gloeosporioides isolates (CG-314) from strawberry, and L-12 from Limonium spp. on the fruit surface. Lesion development on the fruit was measured daily and compared to water-inoculated controls.
The experimental design in inoculated greenhouse plants included different conditions: (i) inoculated plants maintained with overhead irrigation, (ii) inoculated plants maintained with drip irrigation, and (iii) non-inoculated plants placed approximately 10 cm away from inoculated plants maintained with overhead irrigation. All experiments consisted of 24 plants of each species, with four replicates of six plants per species, organized in a completely randomized design. Six leaves from each different plant species (one per different pot) were sampled at each period. Five water-inoculated plants of each host were used as controls. Each experiment was conducted twice, with similar results recorded.
Survival of C. acutatum from strawberry on plants was evaluated by sampling leaves for inoculum survival and colonization before (day 0 or time 0), after the removal of the plastic coverings from the inoculated plants (day 3), and approximately every 7 days thereafter. New foliage emerging post-inoculation was also sampled as the leaves developed to evaluate inoculum dispersal. The leaves were inserted into a plastic Falcon tube containing 10 ml of sterile water and mixed thoroughly for 2 minutes by vortexing to remove conidia from the leaf surface. Microscopic and dilution plating experiments revealed that 80 to 95% of all applied conidia were removed from the leaf surface by this treatment after repeating these procedures at least three times at various periods from 0 to 4 days post-inoculation. Therefore, percent conidial survival was an underestimation of the actual rate of survival. The leaf was removed from the tube after vortexing and used for evaluating pathogen colonization. The tube and contents were then centrifuged at 6,500 × g, the conidial pellet resuspended in 1 ml of water, and conidia were quantified by dilution plating on a semi-selective Colletotrichum medium. The area of each sampled leaf was measured to quantify conidia per square centimeter, with survival calculated at each period for each plant species.
Colonization of different plant species by C. acutatum from strawberry. After conidia were washed from the sampled leaf, the leaf was surface sterilized by submerging it in 3% sodium hypochlorite for 2 minutes, washing in sterilized ddH2O for 1 minute, and drying in a laminar flow hood. All fungal propagules (conidia, mycelium, and nongerminated melanized appressoria) on the leaf surface were killed by this treatment, including conidia that were not entirely removed by the washing and vortexing treatments, as previously described. Thereafter, the leaf was divided into 10 parts and plated on the semiselective Colletotrichum medium to determine the percent colonization.
Extraction, isolation, and purification of fungal DNA. For fungal DNA extraction, liquid cultures comprising 100 ml of MS 988 PHYTOPATHOLOGY medium devoid of agar in 250-ml Erlenmeyer flasks were inoculated with five mycelial disks cut out from colony margins. The cultures were agitated for 5 to 6 days on a rotary shaker at 150 rpm and maintained at 25°C. Mycelia from 100-ml MS liquid cultures were collected by vacuum filtration and lyophilized until dry. DNA was extracted and purified as previously described. The DNA was dissolved in 0.5 ml of TE buffer (10 mM Tris HCl, 1 mM EDTA; pH 8.0) to an approximate concentration of 200 to 500 µg/ml and diluted to a concentration of 10 to 100 ng/µl for PCR reactions.
Extraction, isolation, and purification of plant DNA or pathogen DNA in plants. Plants (strawberry, tomato, eggplant, pepper, and bean) were inoculated under greenhouse conditions as previously described. Three leaves per host plant were sampled daily, washed thoroughly in running tap water, and vortexed to remove conidia from the leaf surface. DNA was extracted essentially as described. Leaf tissue (1 g) was ground in 5 ml of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) buffer (2% CTAB, 1.4 M NaCl, 0.2% β-mercaptoethanol, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0), and a 150-µl chloroform/isoamyl alcohol (24:1) solution was added and heated at 65°C for 30 minutes. The contents were cooled to room temperature, and an 850-µl chloroform/isoamyl alcohol (24:1) solution was added and mixed thoroughly. The water and organic phases were separated by centrifugation at 14,000 × g, and the water phase was collected and transferred to a clean Falcon tube. Two volumes of cold (–20°C) ethanol (95%) were added to the tubes and centrifuged at 14,000 × g to precipitate the DNA. The supernatant was discarded, and the precipitate was washed with an equal volume of 76% ethanol to 0.2 M sodium acetate solution for 5 minutes, then centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 5 minutes. The supernatant was discarded, and the DNA pellet was dissolved in 0.5 ml of TE buffer, pH 8.0. To further purify the DNA, a volume of 0.25 ml of 7.5 N ammonium acetate was added to the DNA pellet and incubated on ice for 20 minutes. Thereafter, the solution was centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 20 minutes, and the supernatant was collected. Isopropanol was added to the supernatant (0.6 vol/vol) and incubated on ice for 20 minutes. The solution was then centrifuged at 5,000 × g for 5 minutes, and the precipitated DNA was collected and dissolved in 0.5 ml of TE buffer. The TE buffer containing DNA was mixed in 2 vol of 95% ethanol and incubated on ice for 30 minutes. The DNA was precipitated to a final concentration with 0.1 M NaCl by centrifugation at 5,000 × g for 5 minutes, dissolved in 0.5 ml of TE buffer, and used in the PCR reactions for pathogen detection in planta.
PCR amplification. For arbitrarily primed PCR (ap-PCR), primers were derived from minisatellite or repeat sequences as follows: CAGCAGCAGCAGCAG, GACACGACACGACAC, and GACAGACAGACAGACA. In the text, these primers have been designated (CAG)5, (GACAC)3, and (GACA)4, respectively. PCR primers
Survival of C. acutatum on inoculated plants involved strawberry, eggplant, tomato, and pepper plants that were inoculated with a conidial suspension of C. acutatum from strawberry. Conidia were recovered from all plants over a 2- to 3-month period, regardless of whether overhead or drip irrigation was used. The number of conidia recovered from strawberry was comparable to that from the other plants at all time points, and in most cases, the differences were insignificant (P < 0.05) across different plant species, although disease symptoms were observed only on strawberry. Significant numbers of conidia were still recovered from the plants at the end of the experiment, indicating that the fungus had a survival potential on all plant species exceeding 3 months. Leaves were sampled at various time points after inoculation, and conidial survival on the surface was quantified (conidia per square centimeter of leaf tissue). Under overhead irrigation, conidia survived on all inoculated plant leaves but decreased by approximately threefold over a 13-week period. Similarly, under drip irrigation, conidia survived on host leaves but declined by approximately twofold during the 7-week experimentation period. Conidial survival was monitored on new foliage sampled post-inoculation at 6 weeks and 4 weeks for overhead and drip irrigation, respectively. Low numbers of conidia (<10 conidia per cm² leaf tissue) were recovered from emerging new foliage of all tested plant species under both irrigation regimes for the duration of the experiments, which lasted 13 and 11 weeks, respectively. Survival of conidia was also assessed in non-inoculated plants located about 10 cm away from inoculated plants under overhead irrigation. The number of conidia was generally low and fluctuated throughout the experiments, ranging between 0 and 30 conidia per cm² of leaf area for all plants; in most instances, these differences were insignificant (P < 0.05) between species. Overall, the conidia counts decreased over time, and few conidia per square centimeter of leaf area remained at the end of the experiment, after 12 weeks.
Colonization of plants by C. acutatum involved inoculating strawberry, eggplant, tomato, and pepper plants with a conidial suspension of C. acutatum from strawberry, maintained under either overhead or drip irrigation regimes. Leaves were collected at various time points post-inoculation, washed to remove conidia, surface sterilized, and plated on a semi-selective Colletotrichum medium to test for the presence of the fungus within the tissue. The fungus was detected within the leaf tissues of all plant species, regardless of the irrigation regime, and differences in colonization among the various plants were insignificant (P < 0.05). Under overhead irrigation, recovery of the pathogen ranged from 90 to 100% in examined tissues over a 6-week period post-inoculation. Colonization declined over time but remained above 50% in the examined tissues until the experiment's conclusion. Under drip irrigation, the pathogen was isolated from all plant leaves, with percent colonization ranging
Colonization remained between 80 and 100% in eggplant and tomato, whereas colonization of strawberry decreased to approximately 40% by the end of the experiment. Pathogen detection in planta with C. acutatum-specific primers showed that the pathogen was readily detected in artificially inoculated strawberry, tomato, eggplant, and pepper leaf tissues by PCR amplification. Species-specific primer analysis was accurate in detecting C. acutatum in planta through amplification of the specific band of 490 bp, observed from 24 hours post-inoculation until 7 days thereafter in the control DNA of isolate TUT-137 of C. acutatum, as well as in inoculated strawberry, tomato, eggplant, and pepper. No amplification product was observed in non-inoculated control leaf tissues. Similar results were obtained in infected bean leaf tissue.
In cross-infection experiments, strawberry fruit were wound or non-wound inoculated with isolates of C. acutatum and C. gloeosporioides from strawberry, as well as C. gloeosporioides from Limonium spp. No significant differences were detected in lesion size caused by the strawberry pathogens on fruit compared to those of the C. gloeosporioides Limonium isolate 9 days after either wound or non-wound inoculations. In cross-inoculation experiments of various fruit with C. acutatum from strawberry, lesions developed over time on all inoculated, wounded fruit, whereas unwounded pear and nectarine showed only minor lesions. Wounding of strawberry and peach did not significantly increase lesion size compared with that of pear and nectarine. No symptoms were observed on inoculated, unwounded apples.
Anthracnose disease caused by C. acutatum has become one of the major fungal pathogens of strawberry worldwide. In Israel, the fungus was first reported in 1995 and has since spread to most strawberry cultivation areas within the country. Mother plants are commonly infected in the nursery; however, symptoms may develop later during daughter plant establishment, after planting. Such mother plants are considered the primary inoculum source on which the fungus proliferates and then spreads to daughter plants in the nursery, and eventually to production fields via transplants. While plant infection in the nursery is an important source of inoculum, there might be additional sources for dissemination of the fungus and initiation of new epidemics, such as other plant species. Strawberry is cultivated alongside tomato, eggplant, pepper, and other vegetable crops, with various weeds persisting in the vicinity of nurseries and within strawberry production fields in Israel.
The main objectives of this study were to assess the potential for cross-inoculation, survival, and pathogenicity of C. acutatum on strawberry and other plants that may serve as a primary inoculum source under greenhouse conditions. It has been reported that cross-infection potential exists within the genus Colletotrichum, and that the fungus may exist in different nonpathogenic, symbiotic lifestyles. In this study, we have shown that C. acutatum from strawberry is capable of causing lesions on various fruit, with or without wounding.
Therefore, under conditions where hosts are susceptible to C. acutatum, such as peach, apple, and anemone, special care should be taken to prevent the pathogen from spreading from one host to another, especially when different hosts are cultivated in close proximity. However, it should be emphasized that the conditions employed during artificial inoculations—such as high inoculum concentration, detached leaves or fruit, and optimized humidity and temperature—may result in cross-infections not observed under field conditions. This is exemplified by C. gloeosporioides, which is pathogenic to Limonium spp. grown in the desert far from strawberry cultivation areas but caused a hypervirulent reaction on artificially inoculated strawberries. Alternatively, postharvest infections are readily achieved by inoculation of detached fruit and plant tissue, which is widely accepted for determining pathogenicity and virulence during storage conditions.
In the study, strawberries (cv. Tamar) were inoculated with isolates of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. gloeosporioides. The inoculation was done by pipetting 5 µl of a suspension containing 5 × 10^6 conidia/ml onto the surface of the fruit, with or without wounding the fruit through pinpricking. Data were collected on lesion sizes from each inoculation period, analyzing ten different fruits, and the results were statistically evaluated using the Tukey-Kramer multiple comparison test at a significance level of P < 0.05. The distance between symbols at each point that is larger than the vertical bar indicates significant differences.
In controlled greenhouse conditions, C. acutatum from strawberry was isolated from inoculated plants that showed no disease symptoms but maintained virulence on the strawberries. The fungus was detected both on and within inoculated leaves at various time points after plant inoculation using a plating method. The authenticity of the isolates as C. acutatum was confirmed by PCR using species-specific primers. The PCR technique proved to be accurate and sensitive enough to detect the pathogen in inoculated tissues within 24 hours post-inoculation. This method is useful for detecting C. acutatum on and within the tissues of various plant species, indicating that the fungus can exhibit both epiphytic and endophytic lifestyles without causing visible disease symptoms.
The PCR and fungal isolation data suggest that the pathogen can remain viable for extended periods in the tissues of various plant species without inducing disease symptoms. Although the experiments were terminated after three months for technical reasons, the final levels of inoculum in the examined tissues and the decay curves indicate that the pathogen has the potential to inhabit the infected plants for much longer. Furthermore, it has been shown that C. acutatum from strawberries can survive for up to nine months within plant debris in soil.
Recently, it has been reported by Leandro et al. that secondary conidia are formed on strawberry leaves in the absence of infection or host penetration. In this work, symptoms of disease were not detected on plants such as tomato, eggplant, pepper, and bean, but conidia survived on the leaf surfaces, possibly as secondary inoculum or within the cuticular and subepidermal leaf tissues. The pathogen was also capable of surviving on the foliage of plants maintained under drip irrigation conditions for at least seven weeks, indicating that low moisture conditions were not detrimental to inoculum viability even in nonpathogenic interactions. C. acutatum was isolated from two weeds, Conyza spp. and Vicia spp., that infested strawberry fields. The weed isolates were similar to those from strawberry, as proved by PCR analysis, and caused typical anthracnose symptoms on strawberry. Thus, not only crop plants but also weeds may be colonized by C. acutatum. This is in accordance with the detection of C. fragariae, pathogenic to strawberry, on weeds such as chickweed, coffeeweed, sicklepod, fiddleneck, and vetch growing in containers and in and around nurseries in Florida. Likewise, strawberry and anemone that are cultivated in close proximity in Israel were found infected by an identical genotype of C. acutatum. Inoculum of Colletotrichum spp. pathogenic to strawberry is usually distributed by splash dispersal, either via overhead irrigation or by rain. In our experiments, it was shown that, under greenhouse conditions, overhead irrigation contributed to the dispersal of inoculum to noninoculated host plants. However, conidia survived and colonized equally well on the surface of drip- compared with overhead-irrigated plants. This may be explained by secondary sporulation contributing to conidial survival and proliferation on the leaf surface during drip irrigation, as opposed to conidial removal from the leaf surface during overhead irrigation. Although C. acutatum survives in the soil, on plant debris, and in fumigated field soil, it is assumed that the main source of inoculum usually originates on infected strawberry plant material from the nursery. However, in nurseries or in production fields, the pathogen may be introduced in contaminated soil, on field equipment, or may be splash dispersed or blown in from surrounding vegetation that may carry the fungus, albeit without visible symptoms. This work has shown that C. acutatum from strawberry can survive and colonize many other plant species under controlled greenhouse conditions without causing disease, exhibiting epiphytic, endophytic, and nonpathogenic lifestyles. These findings emphasize that various crop plants, including weeds, may serve as a potential inoculum source of C. acutatum. The contribution of inoculum that originates in such plants to the development of anthracnose disease in strawberry under field conditions and in the dispersal of the pathogen from season to season will need further investigation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Contribution from the Agricultural Research Organization, The Volcani Center, Bet Dagan, Israel, No. 532/00. This research was supported in part by research grant award IS-2825-97 from BARD, The United States–Israel Binational Agricultural Research and Development Fund, and the European Commission FAIR CT 98-4140 grant awarded to S. Freeman. We thank D. Shtienberg for assistance with statistical analyses.
LITERATURE CITED 1. Adaskaveg, J. E., and Hartin, R. J. 1997. Characterization of Colletotrichum acutatum isolates causing anthracnose of almond and peach in.
