Malaria-infected mice exhibit a range of sickness behaviours, as well as metabolic shifts and physiological pathologies that lead to reduced energy expenditure. Treating sick mice with glucose increases disease tolerance by improving the physiological and behavioural symptoms of malaria infection without affecting parasite loads. When we get an infection, we often feel terrible: we lose our appetite, become less active, sleep more, and experience changes in body temperature. These symptoms—collectively called sickness behaviours—are often not specific to infection by particular pathogens; rather, they are observed across various host species during different infections. Sickness behaviours can even occur by stimulating the host immune response in the absence of any live pathogen, suggesting that at least some of the malaise we feel when infected is a host response, not directly caused by the pathogen. To effectively treat disease, it is necessary to focus not only on eliminating the pathogen causing the infection but also on mitigating the symptoms of infection that arise independently of pathogen burden. A better understanding of why our behaviours and physiology change during infection, causing us to feel ill, can help us design therapeutic interventions that improve our ability to maintain health during infection. In other words, we may be able to use drugs to increase host disease tolerance. After all, when we get sick, what we desire is to feel better, regardless of whether the drugs we take eliminate the source of infection.
In a new study published in this issue of Current Biology, Cumnock et al. find that mice infected with malaria experience various sickness behaviours, including anorexia, lethargy, and hypothermia. By explicitly testing the link between behavioural and metabolic outputs throughout the entire infection cycle, the authors demonstrated that these symptoms could be alleviated with a relatively simple and inexpensive treatment that enhances glycolysis in severely anaemic mice, thereby increasing their tolerance to malaria. The authors collected high-resolution measurements of both behavioural and physiological responses in healthy and malaria-infected mice, such as red blood cell density, body temperature, feeding and drinking rates, activity, and metabolic readouts, all measured at five-minute intervals over two weeks. This detailed examination of whole-animal health at such a high temporal resolution is rare and allowed the authors to connect changes in behaviour and physiology to shifts in metabolic performance and energy expenditure in sick mice. After five days of malaria infection, mice began to show signs of illness. Malaria parasites were detected in the blood, with peak parasite density coinciding with the typical anaemic response (as the number of red blood cells started to decrease) and severe hypothermia (notably, malaria causes temperature to drop in mice, unlike in humans). Sickness behaviours such as anorexia and inactivity also emerged during this period, as the time spent eating, drinking, and being active diminished, reaching the lowest point by day ten.
Although anorexia is a commonly described symptom of many infections, a unique aspect of the work by Cumnock et al. was the ability to link infection-induced anorexia to changes in energy expenditure and metabolism in sick animals. The authors observed that mice at their sickest were anorexic and shifted their metabolism from burning sugar to burning fat and ketones. However, fat metabolism requires oxygen, which is unfortunate for sick mice because, in addition to being anorexic, mice at their sickest are also anemic and therefore less able to carry oxygen. This suggested to the authors that, in order to maintain health, mice would need an energy production method that doesn’t require oxygen. A prime candidate for such a mechanism is glycolysis, as it does not require oxygen to produce ATP and has previously been shown to be an important component in erythropoiesis, a red blood cell-regenerating process that is key to host recovery from malaria infection.
To test this hypothesis, the authors provided sick mice with either 2-deoxyglucose, which inhibits glycolysis, or glucose, which supports glycolysis. As might be expected, 2-deoxyglucose treatment further sickened the malaria-infected animals, resulting in higher peak parasite densities, lower red blood cell counts, hypothermia, and weight loss, ultimately leading to higher mortality. Glucose-treated mice, however, showed slightly higher survival when compared to control mice. Crucially, this was not due to an increased ability to clear the parasite, because the glucose treatment did not affect parasite density relative to that of control mice. Glucose would therefore appear to improve host tolerance of malaria infection without affecting its ability to clear parasites.
This work raises several important questions for how we treat malaria and infections more generally. First, it suggests that simple nutritional manipulations, such as increasing levels of dietary glucose, could be helpful in mitigating the severity of malaria-induced disease. Nutritional immunology—manipulating nutrition to change the outcome of infection—is an established idea, but the prospect of applying such a simple intervention to a disease as serious and complex as malaria is clearly appealing and may even have implications beyond host health, such as reducing the likelihood of drug resistance evolution. The role of host nutritional status on disease tolerance has been demonstrated in a wide range of hosts, including invertebrates such as water fleas, fruit flies, and butterflies, as well as vertebrate hosts like birds infected with avian malaria and rodents with intestinal nematode infections.
This generality is exciting because it suggests that metabolic control of disease tolerance may be evolutionarily conserved across species. However, unlike these previous studies, the nutritional modulation of disease using glucose shown by Cumnock et al. was informed by understanding the mechanistic link between infection-induced anorexia and shifts in metabolism. Similar effects of anorexia on glucose metabolism have also been observed to improve disease tolerance to some bacterial infections, but not others. This suggests that metabolic manipulation may become a promising approach to novel therapeutic interventions, but that the protective effects of glucose supplementation may be infection-specific.
Another noteworthy aspect of the work by Cumnock et al. is that by using therapeutic interventions that increase disease tolerance, we shift the focus from killing pathogens to improving host health. The idea that disease tolerance can offer novel therapeutic targets for diseases generally, and for malaria specifically, has gained traction in recent years. It is therefore tempting to consider that managing infection through metabolic means using simple and inexpensive nutritional supplementation could add to our current arsenal of antimalarial drugs. Clearly, we are still a long way from such an intervention, but the work of Cumnock et al. brings us closer to this goal.
REFERENCES
