Strawberry Anthracnose: Progress toward Control through Science
BARBARA J. SMITH
United States Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Southern Horticultural Laboratory, Small Fruit Research Unit, Poplarville, Mississippi, USA
Anthracnose crown rot has been a destructive disease of strawberries in the southeastern U.S. since the 1930s. The causal fungus, C. fragariae, infects all above-ground plant parts; however, disease is most severe when the fungus infects the crown, causing crown rot, wilt, and death. Colletotrichum gloeosporioides can also cause crown rot and has been a problem since the late 1970s. The anthracnose fruit rot pathogen, Colletotrichum acutatum, was first reported on strawberries in the U.S. in 1986. Scientific investigations of anthracnose have concentrated on its epidemiology, differences among the three causal Colletotrichum species, their infection processes, and pathogenicity. Results from these studies have improved control of this disease.
KEYWORDS: Colletotrichum acutatum, C. fragariae, C. gloeosporioides, Fragaria x ananassa, disease control, fungicides
INTRODUCTION
Colletotrichum species cause serious diseases of many fruit and vegetable crops worldwide. Colletotrichum acutatum, C. fragariae, and C. gloeosporioides cause anthracnose diseases of strawberry. This article is not subject to U.S. copyright law. Mention of trade names or commercial products in this article is solely for the purpose of providing specific information and does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Address correspondence to Barbara J. Smith, USDA-ARS Southern Horticultural Laboratory, Small Fruit Research Unit, P.O. Box 287, 810 Highway 26 West, Poplarville, MS 39470, USA. E-mail: Barbara.Smith@ars.usda.gov
C. acutatum was first reported on strawberry in the U.S. in 1986 and is now widespread, causing major economic losses in production fields. The fungus had previously been reported causing anthracnose fruit rot of strawberry in Queensland, Australia, and now has been identified on strawberries in most areas of the world where they are grown. Colletotrichum fragariae and C. gloeosporioides cause anthracnose crown rot, a destructive disease in strawberry nurseries and fruit production fields in the southeastern U.S. Both species also cause petiole lesions and leaf spots. Anthracnose diseases are increasing in importance and have led to significant economic losses for strawberry growers worldwide. The objective of this report is to provide examples of anthracnose-related research that has enhanced our understanding of these diseases and their control.
PATHOGEN IDENTIFICATION: Cultural characteristics, conidia, appressoria, and setae are used to distinguish Colletotrichum species. In culture, C. acutatum isolates develop colonies that can be white, pink, orange, rose, or beige. They produce fusiform conidia tapered at both ends, do not form setae, and rarely exhibit the ascigerous state. C. fragariae isolates develop colonies that range from beige to olive to dark gray. They produce cylindrical conidia that are sharply tapered on one end and rounded on the other, and they do not form the ascigerous state. C. gloeosporioides isolates are similar to C. fragariae but may form the Glomerella cingulata ascigerous state in culture; their cylindrical conidia are usually rounded at both ends. Isolates of both C. fragariae and C. gloeosporioides produce dark black setae in acervuli in culture and on petiole, stolon, and fruit lesions. The growth rate of C. acutatum in culture is slower than that of the other two species, particularly at higher temperatures. Identifying Colletotrichum species by morphological and cultural characteristics alone is challenging due to overlapping ranges in various traits. Several molecular methods have been employed to differentiate these species, including arbitrary primed polymerase chain reaction (ap-PCR), restriction fragment length polymorphisms (RFLPs) of PCR-amplified ribosomal DNA (rDNA), nucleotide sequences of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions of rDNA, and species-specific primers based on the ITS regions. The greatest economic loss due to anthracnose on strawberry arises from fruit rot caused by C. acutatum, which also infects many other fruit and vegetable crops, including blueberries, blackberries, grapes, tomatoes, peaches, and peppers. Crown infections of strawberry plants by C. acutatum often result in stunted plants rather than plant death. Infected plants typically do not thrive after transplanting and produce few berries at harvest. Colletotrichum fragariae was first identified in Florida in 1931, and it spread throughout the Southeast, where it was responsible for crown rot and the death of many plants in strawberry nurseries during the 1970s. This species has a narrow host range and is rarely found outside the southeastern U.S. It generally causes more severe petiole and crown symptoms than those caused by C. acutatum and is considered by some to be
Colletotrichum gloeosporioides was identified as the causal agent of crown rot, similar to that caused by C. fragariae (Howard et al., 1992), in the late 1970s and devastated the strawberry industry in several states. This species has a wide host and geographic range, causing diseases in many plants worldwide. It can lead to significant plant death in the fall when plants are transplanted to production fields. Colletotrichum acutatum is the most common anthracnose fruit-rotting pathogen, while C. fragariae and C. gloeosporioides are more frequently associated with petiole and stolon lesions as well as crown rot. However, all three species can cause similar symptoms and are sometimes found on the same plant (Howard et al., 1992). Isolates of Colletotrichum spp. have been disseminated worldwide, likely through international plant exchanges, as their genetic polymorphism and geographical origins are not related (Denoyes Rothan et al., 2003; Sreenivasaprasad and Talhinhas, 2005). Colletotrichum acutatum may have evolved into a subgroup that is highly virulent and host-specific to strawberries. Denoyes-Rothan et al. (2003) characterized a group of Colletotrichum isolates using various molecular methods and pathogenicity tests. Random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) polymorphism and internal transcribed spacer 2 sequence data provided genetic evidence of two subgroups within C. acutatum: (1) CA-clonal, which included only isolates from strawberries and exhibited identical RAPD patterns and nearly identical ITS2 sequences, and (2) CA-variable, which included isolates from various hosts and exhibited variable RAPD patterns and divergent ITS2 sequences. Based on these molecular analyses, they proposed that the CA-clonal subgroup contained closely related, highly virulent C. acutatum isolates that may have developed host specialization to strawberries.
Often, the first indication of anthracnose crown rot infection, caused by either C. fragariae or C. gloeosporioides, in plants in the field is the wilting of the youngest leaves (Smith, 1998a). The wilted leaves may appear to recover and become turgid in the evenings; however, most will wilt and die after a few days. A red discoloration then appears within the crown tissue, and the causal pathogen may be isolated from the discolored tissue. C. acutatum can also cause crown death; however, typically only one side of the crown is infected rather than the entire crown, leading to stunted growth without death. Any of the three Colletotrichum spp. may cause petiole and stolon lesions, which are dark brown or black, sunken, and often girdle the petiole or stolon. Pink masses of conidia are usually v
Appressoria and secondary conidia produced by C. acutatum on symptomless foliage may be a significant source of inoculum for fruit infections and may also contribute to the availability of inoculum throughout the growing season. Conidial germination, appressorial production, and secondary conidiation are all favored by longer periods of wetness than the 4 hours required for secondary conidia to form. C. acutatum may survive up to 8 weeks on leaves, up to 5 weeks on fabric, and up to 12 months in soil and plant debris under dry conditions; however, conidia and sclerotia die rapidly under moist conditions, i.e., soil moisture ≥12%. Rain splash is the primary means by which conidia of Colletotrichum spp. are spread from plant to plant in the field. Research has found that anthracnose fruit rot incidence generally declined as plant density increased, concluding that plant density reduces the amount of rain that penetrates the plant canopy, thus reducing splash. Most fruit infections occur within a 25-cm radius of the source of inoculum, typically an infected fruit.
Using light and electron microscopy, researchers studied the infection process of strawberry petioles and stolons by C. acutatum and C. fragariae. The fungi penetrated the cuticle via an appressorium, and their hyphae grew within the cuticle and cell walls of epidermal, subepidermal, and subtending cells. After a brief biotrophic phase, in which the hyphae invaded living cells, they entered an extended necrotrophic phase, proliferating among dead cells. Acervuli erupted through the cuticle and released conidia. Invasion of the vascular tissue typically occurred after acervuli matured but remained minimal.
Since the primary source of infection in most fruiting fields is infected transplants, the planting of disease-free plants is the best control method. However, obtaining anthracnose-free plants has become more difficult as the geographic range of the causal pathogens has expanded to most areas where strawberry plants are produced. Research has demonstrated that anthracnose-free transplants could be produced in the southeastern U.S., where the pathogens are endemic, by locating plant production nurseries away from commercial fruit production fields. Colletotrichum spp. infect many other hosts; therefore, it is sometimes assumed that the primary infection in strawberry fields is from infected plants of these hosts growing nearby.
To test the hypothesis that Colletotrichum spp. may move from other fruit or vegetable crops to strawberries, researchers wound-inoculated the leaves and stems of strawberry, blueberry, blackberry, muscadine grape, tomato, and pepper with various Colletotrichum isolates, representing multiple species collected from different hosts. Isolates of Colletotrichum fragariae were the most aggressive, causing lesions at an average of 38% of inoculation sites on all hosts except pepper. The percentage of infection for the other eight Colletotrichum species ranged from 5% to 25%. Strawberry was the most susceptible host, with 58% of petiole and 14% of leaf infection from all isolates resulting in lesion development. Conversely, pepper was the most resistant host, with no symptom development on leaves or stems following inoculation with any isolate. These results suggest that primary anthracnose infections in strawberry production fields are most often from infected strawberry transplants and only rarely from anthracnose-infect
Anthracnose spreads within a field by splashing water. Living mulches (such as wheat, rye, or rye grass) in row middles have been shown to reduce disease spread within a field. Organic mulches, such as wheat straw or pine needles, will also reduce splash and result in lower incidence of anthracnose compared to rows mulched with plastic. Anthracnose is less severe when water is supplied to plants using drip rather than overhead irrigation. Anthracnose crown rot is less severe in commercial fields when strawberries are grown on soils with low nitrogen fertility. In greenhouse studies, strawberries grown in soils with high levels of nitrogen, especially from ammonium sources, were more susceptible to anthracnose than plants grown in soils with lower nitrogen levels or those with high levels of calcium nitrate. In field studies, it was shown that higher levels of nitrogen and potassium increased anthracnose crown rot disease severity compared to phosphorus and calcium. Anthracnose fruit rot was less severe on fruit from greenhouse-grown plants receiving drench or foliar applications of calcium sulfate than on fruit from plants receiving water, calcium chloride, or calcium nitrate treatments. Fruit from plants receiving foliar applications of calcium chloride developed less fruit rot than those from plants receiving soil applications of calcium chloride.
In the early 1980s, when anthracnose became a major disease of strawberries in the southeastern U.S., breeding programs to develop anthracnose-resistant cultivars adapted to the strawberry-growing areas in the southeastern U.S. were instituted by the USDA, ARS in Mississippi and Maryland, and at state experiment stations in Florida, Louisiana, and North Carolina. The USDA-ARS program resulted in over 1,500 anthracnose-resistant selections made from seedlings field-tested in Mississippi. Four of these anthracnose-resistant strawberry clones were released as breeding lines, and one was released as the cultivar Pelican, which is highly resistant to anthracnose crown rot caused by Colletotrichum fragariae and to anthracnose fruit rot caused by C. acutatum. 'Pelican' is also resistant to five races of red stele caused by Phytophthora fragariae. Other selections have been used as parent lines in several breeding programs. To increase the genetic diversity in the strawberry germplasm used in breeding programs, anthracnose-resistant clones have been identified in native plant collections and are being used as parent lines. The resistance of strawberry plants to C. fragariae is influenced by environmental conditions after inoculation. Plants incubated at a high temperature (35°C) for 48 hours at a relative humidity near 100% developed more severe disease symptoms than plants incubated at 25 or 30°C. Further incubation at 32°C results in more severe symptoms than incubation at 25°C. Tissue culture-induced (somaclonal) variation is another strategy that has been pursued for generating disease-resistant genotypes. Planting resistant cultivars, such as Sweet Charlie, Florida Radiance, and Florida Elyana, has reduced losses due to anthracnose fruit rot.
Florida, possibly because C. acutatum lacks the genetic diversity to overcome this resistance. However, when moderately susceptible cultivars (e.g., Strawberry Festival) or highly susceptible cultivars (e.g., Camarosa and Treasure) are grown, regular applications of fungicides are often needed to suppress the disease.
Unless highly resistant cultivars are grown, growers must rely on a combination of chemical applications and cultural practices to reduce losses due to anthracnose. The failure of fungicides to control anthracnose epidemics in the past may have been due to the development of fungicide resistance in the Colletotrichum spp. population. In the early 1970s, benomyl was shown to effectively reduce the incidence of anthracnose crown rot and was used intensively by strawberry growers for years to control anthracnose and other diseases. However, the anthracnose pathogens developed resistance to it and other benzimidazole fungicides, rendering benomyl ineffective. In vitro and greenhouse trials have been conducted to identify fungicides to which the Colletotrichum pathogens have developed resistance. Fungicide labels now address the issue of pathogen resistance by restricting the number of consecutive applications and the total applications of a product per season. For example, the use of fungicides such as Abound (azoxystrobin), Cabrio (pyraclostrobin), and Pristine (pyraclostrobin and boscalid) is limited to four or five applications per season, with no more than two consecutive applications before alternating with a fungicide that has a different mode of action. Natural products have also been evaluated as alternate fungicides with different modes of action, lower toxicity, and increased efficacy.
The efficacy of fungicides for anthracnose control is routinely evaluated in field studies. For instance, 16 different fungicide treatments were evaluated in five studies conducted at Hammond, LA, and Poplarville, MS, during the 2002, 2003, and 2005 fruiting seasons. In these trials, the most frequent fruit rots at harvest were anthracnose fruit rot, stem end rot (caused by Gnomonia comari), and gray mold (caused by Botrytis cinerea). Compared to the nontreated control treatment, less anthracnose fruit rot occurred on berries from the pyraclostrobin + boscalid, cyprodinil + fludioxonil, azoxystrobin, pyraclostrobin, captan + fenhexamid, and captan treatments. Studies conducted in North Carolina indicated that a fungicide spray program with only four applications (one application of a mixture of captan and Topsin M, two applications of Pristine, and one application of CaptEvate) provided a similar level of disease control as a season-long spray program with eight applications. Each of the applications in the shorter program actually contained two fungicides since Pristine and CaptEvate each contains two. Based on field
Later, when anthracnose-infected flowers and fruit may be present in the fields, the recommendation is to increase the rate of the protectant fungicide to the highest label rate. Warm, rainy weather in early spring often leads to epidemics during which additional fungicides may be needed. Growers are encouraged to scout their fields regularly for anthracnose symptoms, such as blighted flowers or black spots on green fruit. If symptoms are found, a strobilurin fungicide is recommended to be applied alongside the regularly used protectant fungicide. During the main bloom period, in late January and early February, fungicides containing two active ingredients (one for anthracnose control and one for Botrytis fruit rot control), such as Captevate, Pristine, or Switch, are recommended. Tank mixes or higher rates of protectant fungicides should continue until the end of the harvest season or until dry weather completely suppresses the disease. The effectiveness of fungicides can be improved and their cost reduced when applications are based on environmental models rather than on a calendar schedule. Equations to predict the severity of both anthracnose and Botrytis fruit rots have been developed in Florida based on temperature and leaf wetness duration. This information was used to develop a decision support system for growers to make recommendations on the timing of fungicide applications for controlling fruit rot diseases. Field tests of the system showed that the number of fungicide applications could be reduced by half without any significant loss of yield or quality.
As our knowledge of the anthracnose pathogens and the epidemiology of anthracnose diseases has increased, so has our ability to control these diseases. Changes in cultural practices have resulted in reduced levels of disease. At the same time, the development of more effective fungicides and their registration for use on strawberries have greatly reduced losses due to anthracnose crown rot and fruit rot. Partly-resistant cultivars have also reduced economic losses due to these diseases. Even so, growers may sustain severe losses when environmental factors are highly favorable for anthracnose development. Increased losses due to anthracnose fruit and crown rots may be related to the shift from matted row culture to the annual plasticulture production system in the U.S. Breeding for resistance to anthracnose and the development of resistant cultivars is a primary means for reducing economic losses due to this disease and would result in reduced use of fungicides.
Literature Cited: Abril, M., K.J. Curry, B.J. Smith, and D.E. Wedge. 2008. Improved microassays used to test natural product-based and conventional fungicides on plant pathogenic fungi. Plant Dis. 92:106–112. Ballington, J.R., J.L. Shuman, B.J. Smith, and S.C. Hokanson. 2002. Breeding strawberries (Fragaria x ananassa) for resistance to anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum acutatum. Acta Hort. 567:89–92. Bernstein, B., E.I.
Curry, K.J., M. Abril, J.B. Avant, and B.J. Smith. 2002. Strawberry anthracnose: Histopathology of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. fragariae. Phytopathology 92:1055–1063. Denoyes-Rothan, B., G. Guerin, C. Delye, B. Smith, D. Minz, M. Maymon, and S. Freeman. 2003. Genetic diversity and pathogenic variability among isolates of Colletotrichum species from strawberry. Phytopathology 93:219–228. Feil, W.S., E.E. Bulter, J.M. Duniway, and W.D. Gubler. 2003. The effects of moisture and temperature on the survival of Colletotrichum acutatum on strawberry residue in soil. Can. J. Plant Pathol. 25:362–370. Freeman, S., D. Minz, E. Jurkevitch, M. Maymon, and E. Shabi. 2000a. Molecular analyses of Colletotrichum species from almond and other fruits. Phytopathology 90:608–614. Freeman, S., E. Shabi, and T. Katan. 2000b. Characterization of Colletotrichum acutatum causing anthracnose disease of anemone (Anemone coronaria L.). Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66:5267–5272. Galletta, G.J., B.J. Smith, and C.L. Gupton. 1993. Strawberry parent clones US70, US159, US292, and US438 resistant to anthracnose crown rot. HortScience 28:1055–1056. Galletta, G.J., J.L. Maas, C.E. Finn, B.J. Smith, and C.L. Gupton. 1997. The United States Department of Agriculture strawberry breeding program. Fruit Var. J. 51:204–210. Hammerschlag, F., K. Lewers, S. Ray, and B.J. Smith. 2006. In vitro response of strawberry cultivars and regenerants to Colletotrichum acutatum. Plant Cell, Tissue & Organ Cult. 84:255–261. Horn, N.L., K.R. Burnside, and R.B. Carver. 1972. Control of the crown rot phase of strawberry anthracnose through sanitation, bre
Madden, L.V. and L.L. Wilson. 1997. Effect of rain distribution alteration on the splash dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum. Phytopathology 87:649–655. Madden, L.V. and M.A. Boudreau. 1997. Effect of strawberry density on the spread of anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum acutatum. Phytopathology 87:828–838. Mertely, J.C., N.A. Peres, and C.K. Chandler. 2009. Anthracnose fruit rot of strawberry. Publication #PP-207, University of Florida, IFAS EDIS, Gainesville, FL. McInnes, T.B., L.L. Black, and J.M. Gatti, Jr. 1992a. Disease-free plants for management of strawberry anthracnose crown rot. Plant Dis. 76:260–264. McInnes, T.B., L.L. Black, and J.M. Gatti, Jr. 1992b. Fungicides for control of strawberry anthracnose crown rot in summer nurseries. Adv. Strawberry Res. 11:12–16. Nam, M.H., S.K. Jeong, Y.S. Lee, J.M. Choi, and H.G. Kim. 2006. Effects of nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, and calcium nutrition on strawberry anthracnose. Plant Pathol. 55:246–249. Norman, D.J. and J.O. Strandberg. 1997. Survival of Colletotrichum acutatum in soil and plant debris of leatherleaf fern. Plant Dis. 81:1177–1180. Pavan, W., C.W. Fraisse, and N.A. Peres. 2009. A decision support tool for timing fungicide applications in strawberry. Univ. of Florida Publ. AE450, Agricultural and Biological Engineering Department, Florida Cooperative Extension Service, IFAS, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL. Rahman, N., M. Carnes, J. Driver, and F.J. Louws. 2009. Fungicidal control of anthracnose fruit rot in the strawberry cultivar Chandler in North Carolina. Plant Dis. Management Reports 4
. Simmonds, J.H. 1965. A study of the species of Colletotrichum causing ripe fruit rots in Queensland. Queensland J. Agric. Anim. Sci. 22:437–459. Smith, B.J. 1998a. Anthracnose crown rot, p. 46–48. In: J.L. Maas (ed.). Compendium of Strawberry Diseases, 2nd edition. American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. Smith, B.J. 1998b. Anthracnose fruit rot (Black Spot), p. 31–33. In: J.L. Maas (ed.). Compendium of Strawberry Diseases, 2nd edition. American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. Smith, B.J. 1998c. Anthracnose leaf spot and irregular leaf spot, p. 24–25. In: J.L. Maas (ed.). Compendium of Strawberry Diseases, 2nd edition. American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. Smith, B.J. 2002. Susceptibility of vegetative tissues of fruit and vegetable hosts to infection by various *Colletotrichum
Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1990. Morphological, cultural, and pathogenic variation among Colletotrichum species isolated from strawberry. Plant Dis. 74:69–76. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1991. Greenhouse efficacy of fungicides for control of anthracnose crown rot of strawberry, p. 221–223. In: A. Dale and J. Luby (eds.). The strawberry into the 21st century. Timber Press, Portland, OR. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1992. In vitro activity of fungicides against Colletotrichum fragariae. Acta Hort. 348:509–512. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1993. In vitro fungicide studies show the occurrence of benomyl-resistant Colletotrichum spp. from strawberry. Adv. Strawberry Res. 12:42–48. Smith, B.J., C.L. Gupton, G.J. Galletta, J.L. Maas, J.M. Enns, J.R. Ballington, Jr., R.J. Constantin, T.J. DiVittorio, and D. Himelrick. 1998. ‘Pelican’ strawberry. HortScience 33:1082–1084. Smith, B.J., J. Chen, and R. Albibi. 2007. Genotypic and phenotypic comparisons among isolates of Colletotrichum species from strawberry and other fruit crops, p. 87–93. In: F. Takeda, D.T. Handley, and E.B. Poling (eds.). Proc. 2007 North American Strawberry Symposium; North American Strawberry Growers Association, Kemptville, ON Canada. Smith, B.J., L.L. Black, and G.J. Galletta. 1990. Resistance to Colletotrichum fragariae in strawberry affected by seedling age and inoculation method. Plant Dis. 74:1016–1021. Sreenivasaprasad, S. and P. Talhinhas. 2005. Genotypic and phenotypic diversity in Colletotrichum acutatum, a cosmopolitan pathogen causing anthracnose on a wide range of hosts. Mol. Plant Pathol. 6:361–378. Sutton, B.C. 1992. The genus Glomerella and its anamorph Colletotrichum, p. 1–26. In: J.A. Bailey and M.J. Jeger (eds.). Colletotrichum: Biology, pathology and control. CAB International, Wallingford, UK. Urena-Padilla, A.R., D.J. Mitchell, and D.E. Legard. 2001. Oversummer survival of inoculum of Colletotrichum crown rot in buried strawberry crown tissue. Plant Dis. 85:750–754. Wedge, D.E., B.J. Smith, J.P. Quebedeaux, and R.J. Constantin. 2007. Fungicide management strategies for control of strawberry
Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1990. Morphological, cultural, and pathogenic variation among Colletotrichum species isolated from strawberry. Plant Dis. 74:69–76. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1991. Greenhouse efficacy of fungicides for control of anthracnose crown rot of strawberry, p. 221–223. In: A. Dale and J. Luby (eds.). The strawberry into the 21st century. Timber Press, Portland, OR. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1992. In vitro activity of fungicides against Colletotrichum fragariae. Acta Hort. 348:509–512. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1993. In vitro fungicide studies show the occurrence of benomyl-resistant Colletotrichum spp. from strawberry. Adv. Strawberry Res. 12:42–48. Smith, B.J., C.L. Gupton, G.J. Galletta, J.L. Maas, J.M. Enns, J.R. Ballington, Jr., R.J. Constantin, T.J. DiVittorio, and D. Himelrick. 1998. ‘Pelican’ strawberry. HortScience 33:1082–1084. Smith, B.J., J. Chen, and R. Albibi. 2007. Genotypic and phenotypic comparisons among isolates of Colletotrichum species from strawberry and other fruit crops, p. 87–93. In: F. Takeda, D.T. Handley, and E.B. Poling (eds.). Proc. 2007 North American Strawberry Symposium; North American Strawberry Growers Association, Kemptville, ON Canada. Smith, B.J., L.L. Black, and G.J. Galletta. 1990. Resistance to Colletotrichum fragariae in strawberry affected by seedling age and inoculation method. Plant Dis. 74:1016–1021. Sreenivasaprasad, S. and P. Talhinhas. 2005. Genotypic and phenotypic diversity in Colletotrichum acutatum, a cosmopolitan pathogen causing anthracnose on a wide range of hosts. Mol. Plant Pathol. 6:361–378. Sutton, B.C. 1992. The genus Glomerella and its anamorph Colletotrichum, p. 1–26. In: J.A. Bailey and M.J. Jeger (eds.). Colletotrichum: Biology, pathology and control. CAB International, Wallingford, UK. Urena-Padilla, A.R., D.J. Mitchell
