Strawberry Anthracnose: Histopathology of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. fragariae
Vol. 92, No. 10, 2002
Mycology
Strawberry Anthracnose: Histopathology of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. fragariae
Kenneth J. Curry, Maritza Abril, Jana B. Avant, and Barbara J. Smith
First, second, and third authors: University of Southern Mississippi, Hattiesburg 39406; and fourth author: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Small Fruit Research Station, P.O. Box 287, Poplarville, MS 39470. Accepted for publication 23 May 2002.
ABSTRACT
Curry, K. J., Abril, M., Avant, J. B., and Smith, B. J. 2002. Strawberry anthracnose: Histopathology of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. fragariae. Phytopathology 92:1055-1063.
The ontogeny of the invasion process by Colletotrichum acutatum and C. fragariae was studied on petioles and stolons of the strawberry cultivar Chandler using light and electron microscopy. The invasion of host tissue by each fungal species was similar; however, each invasion event occurred more rapidly with C. fragariae than with C. acutatum. Following cuticular penetration via an appressorium, subsequent steps of invasion involved hyphal growth within the cuticle and within the cell walls of epidermal, subepidermal, and subtending cells. Both species of fungi began invasion with a brief biotrophic phase before entering an extended necrotrophic phase. Acervuli formed once the cortical tissue had been moderately disrupted, beginning with the development of a stroma just beneath the outer periclinal epidermal walls. Acervuli erupted through the cuticle and released conidia. Invasion of the vascular tissue typically occurred after acervulus maturation and remained minimal. Chitin distribution in the walls of C. fragariae was visualized with gold-labeled wheat germ agglutinin. The outer layer of bilayered walls of conidia, germ tubes, and appressoria contained less chitin than unilayered hyphae in planta.
Additional keywords: colloidal gold, hemibiotrophy, host–pathogen interactions, lectin, ultrastructure.
Anthracnose diseases of strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa Duch.) are caused by the fungal pathogens Colletotrichum acutatum Simmonds, C. fragariae Brooks, and C. gloeosporioides (Penz.) Penz. and Sacc. (teleomorph Glomerella cingulata (Stonem.) Spauld. & Schrenk). All three species cause diseases that cannot be distinguished in the field by symptoms alone. Petiole and stolon lesions occur on plants grown worldwide but may go undetected in cool, dry areas where they cause little injury to the plants. C. fragariae is most often associated with anthracnose crown rot of strawberries grown in hot, humid areas such as the southeastern United States. Its host range is limited to strawberries and a few weeds. C. acutatum is the primary causal agent of anthracnose fruit rot
OSRAM Sylvania, Danvers, MA). Conidial suspensions used for inoculations were prepared by flooding each PDA culture plate with sterile deionized water and gently scraping the agar surface with a glass rod to remove conidia. The resulting conidial suspension was filtered through cheesecloth, and a final conidial suspension of 1.5 × 10^6 conidia per ml was used to inoculate strawberry plants. Attached petioles and stolons were inoculated by misting to the point of runoff or by spot inoculation. Plants were incubated in a sealed 10-gallon tank at 100% relative humidity for 24 hours and then at reduced relative humidity by removing half of the plastic tank cover for the remainder of the incubation time. Plants inoculated with Colletotrichum acutatum were incubated at 28°C; those inoculated with Colletotrichum fragariae were incubated at 32°C. Following inoculation, petioles and stolons were examined microscopically at 8- to 10-hour intervals for 96 hours to document the morphology and time required for germ tube development, appressorial formation, penetration of the epidermis, subsequent invasion of tissue, development of disease symptoms, and acervulus production.
Tissue processing involved fixing symptomatic tissue for 2 hours in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer (pH 7.0), 2.0% formaldehyde, and 2.5% glutaraldehyde. The tissue was rinsed with distilled water and postfixed for 45 minutes in cacodylate buffered (pH 7.0) 1% osmium tetroxide. It was dehydrated using an ethanol series (50%, 70%, 85%, 95%, and 100%), followed by propylene oxide. The tissue was then infiltrated with a 50/50% by volume mixture of ERL 4206 resin (Spurr’s) and propylene oxide for 4 hours on a rotator, followed by a 75/25% by volume resin/propylene oxide change overnight on a rotator. The tissue was infiltrated with two changes of 100% resin over an 8-hour period and cured at 70°C for 24 to 36 hours. The ERL 4206 resin contained nonenyl succinic anhydride (26 g), vinyl cyclohexene dioxide (10 g), diglycidyl ether (6 g), and dimethyl aminoethanol (0.2 g).
Slides with semithin sections (approximately 1 µm) were placed on a hotplate at 55°C, stained for 1 to 2 minutes with 0.1% aqueous toluidine blue O, and examined with a light microscope. Ultrathin sections (approximately 100 nm) were taken with a Porter-Blum MT-2B microtome and a diamond knife and collected on 200-mesh copper grids.
The time from inoculation of strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa cv. Chandler) with two Colletotrichum species to the first observation of infection events is detailed as follows: For Colletotrichum acutatum, the visible lesions appeared on pe
Grids were stained with lead citrate and 2% aqueous uranyl acetate. Sections were viewed using a Zeiss EM 10-C transmission electron microscope. We developed a procedure to aid in the location of appressoria on fixed, embedded material. Slivers of epidermal tissue on which appressoria had been observed with a compound microscope were flat-embedded in 2 to 3 mm of resin and cured at 70°C for 20 to 24 hours. Appressoria on the host tissue were identified through the thin plastic with a compound microscope, and hand sections containing appressoria were obtained. Those hand sections were then remounted with Duco cement on prefaced stubs created by curing Spurr’s plastic in polyethylene capsules size “00” and trimmed with a 1 × 1 mm face for ultrathin sectioning.
The light micrographs taken 72 hours after inoculation with Colletotrichum spp. show different stages of invasion. The petiole inoculated with C. acutatum displays an advanced stage of invasion, characterized by disrupted cortex and a mature acervulus on the intact epidermal and subepidermal layers, while the vascular tissue (phloem and xylem) remains intact. In the stolon inoculated with C. fragariae, hyphae are invading parenchyma cells and vessel members. The host cuticle expands as the acervulus enlarges, and the mature acervulus and stroma typically occupy the epidermal and subepidermal host layers, while the cortex experiences extensive destruction.
The electron micrograph of an appressorium of Colletotrichum fragariae shows it separated from an adjacent fungal cell by a matrix. The probe labeled the inner walls, and not the outer walls or matrix, with the basal pore located on the basal portion of the appressorium and delimited by a membrane. Another electron micrograph displays a germinated conidium of Colletotrichum fragariae, showing the gold probe labeling chitin on the inner wall and the septum, while being absent from the outer wall and matrix.
The application of the wheat germ agglutinin lectin probe for chitin involved floating ultrathin sections on 200-mesh nickel grids in phosphate buffered saline for 1 hour, followed by incubation with a lectin-gold complex for 2 hours. Each grid was then washed and air-dried before staining with lead citrate and uranyl acetate. For controls, four-day-old cultures of C. fragariae grown on PDA were overlaid with a thin layer of agar, cut into plugs, fixed, processed for ultrathin sectioning, and probed with gold-labeled lectin as previously described.
The specificity of the WGA lectin binding was determined by the following tests used by Benhamou. These controls were run simultaneously with the application of the normal probe on symptomatic tissue. (1) The gold-labeled lectin was first pre-adsorbed with poly-(1-4)-β-N-acetyl-D-glucosamine purified from crab shells at a concentration of 1 mg per 2 ml of probe for 1 hour and then applied as described above to sections containing fungi from a strawberry petiole lesion 1 mm or larger. (2) The ultrathin sections were floated on a drop of PBS for 1 hour and probed with wheat germ agglutinin without a gold label for 1 hour. The remainder of the probe application was as described above.
RESULTS
Light microscopy. The ontogeny of the infection processes of C. acutatum and C. fragariae on inoculated plants were similar at the light or electron microscopic levels. Lesions most commonly developed on stolon tips and the upper portion of the youngest petiole with fully expanded leaflets. Lesions were first observed 2 days after inoculation as lenticular brown spots that developed into the dark, sunken, and leathery lesions typical of anthracnose that eventually girdled the stolon or petiole. Spore germination began as early as 16 hours after inoculation, with the germ tubes originating from either end of a conidium and occasionally from both ends. Germ tubes generally spanned one plant cell length or less, but occasionally grew across several cells. Appressorial formation began as early as 20 hours after inoculation. Development of an appressorium began as a swelling of the germ tube tip. Appressorial development could occur on such a short germ tube as to appear sessile. Appressoria were initially unmelanized, but by 24 hours they were fully pigmented. Small circular areas on the basal sides of appressoria, seen by focusing through an appressorium with the light microscope, were interpreted to be pores from which the penetration pegs developed. The typical mature appressorium for either species was globose and approximately 3 to 5 µm in diameter. Appressoria frequently developed over anticlinal host walls, but occasionally were found over periclinal walls or near stomata. Appressoria and their basal pores were found on the surface of both healthy and diseased plant tissue.
The first signs of host cell distress appeared when the cell wall contour became distorted, and the plasmalemma pulled away from the cell wall. Hyphae during early stages of lesion formation were less abundant in epidermal and subepidermal cells than in cortical cells. A gradual increase of fungal hyphae in the host cuticle, epidermis, and subepidermis was observed, with hyphae restricted to the apoplast in early stages of invasion and then invading dead cells. As the infection progressed, cell walls became increasingly distorted. In contrast to disrupted cortical cell walls, epidermal and subepidermal walls remained intact even though hyphae penetrated their walls.
Fig. 6. Electron micrographs showing later stages of invasion. A, Stolon 72 hours after inoculation with Colletotrichum fragariae. B, Petiole 116 hours after inoculation with C. acutatum. A and B depict the penetration of dead host cells. Some host cells were characterized by electron-dense osmiophilic material associated with the tonoplast (A), while others were not (B). C and D illustrate the early development of a stroma in stolon 116 hours after inoculation with C. fragariae. C shows hypha (h) growing from the subepidermis to the epidermal layer. D shows initial stromatic fungal cells located between the cuticle and the host wall of the epidermal layer. Notable observations include the increasing degree of vacuolation (v) of fungal cells, the disruption of the tonoplast, and the presence of abundant osmiophilic material. c = cuticle; e = epidermal layer; f = fungal cell; hw = host wall; o = osmiophilic material; arrow = tonoplast. Bar = 2 µm.
Formation occurred concurrently (Fig. 2A and B). The fungus was seen in vessel elements (Fig. 2B) during this last phase of the invasion process. Acervulus formation began with the development of a stroma within the cuticle of epidermal cells. The cuticle expanded considerably to accommodate the growing acervulus (Fig. 2C). The maturing acervulus broke through the cuticle and eventually produced conidia (Fig. 2D). The acervulus expanded radially, with the stroma also extending from the epidermis to the subepidermis. Acervuli were produced over a disrupted cortex, or in extreme cases, over a completely disintegrated cortex (Fig. 2D). In either case, the epidermal and some of the subepidermal tissue remained intact.
The invasion of host tissue by C. fragariae and C. acutatum was similar; however, each invasion event occurred more rapidly with C. fragariae than with C. acutatum. Lesions were visible on petioles 3 days after inoculation with C. fragariae, but were not visible until 4 days after inoculation with C. acutatum. A similar delay in invasion events was observed between petiole and stolon tissues following inoculation of either species. Most events were observed a day sooner on the stolons than on the petioles within species.
Electron microscopy revealed that the conidial and germ tube walls comprised two layers, with the outer layer being thinner and more electron-dense
Some hyphae invaded the cuticle, outer epidermal wall, and anticlinal walls of the epidermis. Some hyphae initially penetrated what appeared to be living host cells. The host plasmalemma invaginated to accommodate hyphal penetration. The interface of the host membrane and hyphal wall was frequently associated with a particular arrangement of electron-dense material. Several degrees of disturbance and relaxation of the microfibrillar components of cell walls were observed during the penetration of host cells, including early penetration events. The death of fungal cells was a rare occurrence. Several dying host cells exhibited an amorphous, osmiophilic material around the inside portion of the tonoplast; others did not. Some cortical fungal hyphae appeared to be growing back to the epidermis in the stage prior to acervulus formation. Acervulus formation involved the development of a subcuticular stroma within and beneath the outer host epidermal cell walls. A gradual vacuolation developed in stromatic cells. Electron micrographs showed an early and a mature acervulus of Colletotrichum acutatum on the petiole 72 hours after inoculation. The host cuticle has expanded to accommodate the expanding stroma in and about the intact host cell wall; the host cuticle has ruptured, and early development of conidia has commenced. Late development of the acervulus included the extension of the host cuticle to accommodate the expanding stroma, the rupture of the cuticle, and early development of conidia. C. acutatum and C. fragariae had a pulvinate type of acervulus.
There were no apparent variations in the labeling of walls of fungi grown on PDA when compared to both young and older hyphae from lesions in planta. The WGA probe was evenly distributed on the unilayered walls. Septa were labeled with the same intensity as the outer walls. Labeling was diminished as expected when the probe was preadsorbed with chitin. Labeling was diminished as expected when the sections were incubated with lectin before applying the lectin-gold complex.
Colletotrichum acutatum and C. fragariae underwent a very brief biotrophic phase (less than 12 hours) before entering their extended necrotrophic phase. Representatives of both species of fungi were observed entering living host cells and developing a matrix comparable to that described in reported biotrophic systems, but they killed the host cells within a few hours. Previous descriptions for other Colletotrichum species cite biotrophy at a minimum of “less than 24 hours.” However, a situation in which a living cell is entered and quickly killed might be considered a modification of necrotrophy, rather than biotrophy or hemibiotrophy. Both intracellular hemibiotrophic and subcuticular intramu
Colletotrichum species avoid triggering resistance responses during the symptomless phase. Species with an intracellular hemibiotrophic strategy require an intimate cytoplasmic interaction between the plant and the pathogen, while species with a subcuticular intramural strategy do not require such intimacy. Since the former species have a restricted host range, they are considered specialists, while the latter species are considered generalists. Regardless of the length of the biotrophic phase, all species eventually revert to necrotrophic development. Since C. acutatum is a generalist invader, only necrotrophic development was predicted, while C. fragariae is a specialist invader for which an extended biotrophic phase was predicted to precede the necrotrophic phase. The brevity of the biotrophic phase in C. acutatum and C. fragariae leaves some uncertainty about calling these fungi hemibiotrophs and comparing their initial infection strategies in terms of previously described species. Penetration pegs were observed in our studies at the light microscope level but not at the ultrastructural level. Appressoria of C. fragariae observed at the ultrastructural level may have been in the process of forming a penetration peg or may have been arrested just prior to the formation of a penetration peg. Latent or quiescent stages have been observed in fungal infections of fruits, where the mature appressorium often will not produce a peg until the fruit is at a particular stage of ripeness. This concept has not been sufficiently studied in strawberries for the fungal penetration of stolons, petioles, leaves, or roots. Strawberry petioles are often more resistant to infection by C. fragariae while the plant is in fruit. Development of appressoria of some species ceases under the onset of unfavorable conditions, remains latent, and resumes when the conditions are again favorable. The more rapid invasion of host tissue by C. fragariae than by C. acutatum is in agreement with previous reports that C. fragariae is more aggressive than C. acutatum in inciting disease symptoms following inoculation.
The distribution of chitin visualized by WGA gold probe in C. lindemuthianum has been reported. We found several similarities as well as some differences between their findings and our results using the same probe to study C. fragariae. The outer appressorial wall layer of C. lindemuthianum was labeled more heavily by the probe than the inner layer. By contrast, the outer appressorial wall layer of C. fragariae was labeled less heavily by the probe than the inner layer. The matrices of both C. lindemuthianum and C. fragariae were unlabeled. The young intracellular hyphae of C. lindemuthianum were unlabeled, but the invasive hyphal walls of C. fragar
American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. Smith, B. J. 1998. Anthracnose leaf spot and irregular leaf spot. Pages 46-48 in: Compendium of Strawberry Diseases. 2nd ed. J. L. Maas, ed. The American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. Smith, B. J. 2002. Susceptibility of vegetative tissues of fruit and vegetable hosts to infection by various Colletotrichum species. Acta Hortic. 567:631-634. Smith, B. J., and Black, L. L. 1987. Resistance of strawberry plants to Colletotrichum fragariae affected by environmental conditions. Plant Dis. 71:834-837. Smith, B. J., and Black, L. L. 1990. Morphological, cultural, and pathogenic variation among Colletotrichum species isolated from strawberry. Plant Dis. 74:69-76. Sutton, B. C. 1966. The appressoria of Colletotrichum graminicola and Colletotrichum falcatum. Can. J. Bot. 44:887-897. Walker, J. C. 1921. Onion smudge. J. Agric. Res. 20:685-721. Wharton, P. S., Julian, A. M., and O’Connell, R. J. 2001. Ultrastructure of the infection of Sorghum bicolor by Colletotrichum sublineolum. Phytopathology 91:149-158. Whiteside, J. O. 1998. Symptomless and quiescent infections by fungi. Page 30 in: Compendium of Citrus Diseases. 1st ed. J. O. Whiteside, S. M. Garnsey, and L. W. Timmers, eds. The American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN.
