The Colletotrichum acutatum Species Complex as a Model System to Study Evolution and Host Specialization in Plant Pathogens
Published: 11 October 2017
Edited by: John R. Battista, Louisiana State University, United States
Reviewed by: Sébastien Guyader, INRA, France; Baojun Wu, Clark University, United States
*Correspondence: Pedro Talhinhas, Instituto Superior de Agronomia, Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal
The Colletotrichum acutatum Species Complex is a diverse yet relatively closely related group of plant pathogenic fungi within the genus Colletotrichum. This genus contains approximately 189 species organized into at least 11 major phylogenetic lineages, known as species complexes. The C. acutatum species complex exhibits a wide range of important traits, including host range, host preference, mode of reproduction, and variations in infection strategies. Research on fungal comparative genomics has attempted to find correlations among these traits and patterns of gene family evolution, although such studies typically compare fungi from different genera or even different fungal orders. The C. acutatum species complex encompasses much of this diversity within a group of relatively closely related species. This article reviews current knowledge on C. acutatum phylogeny, biology, and pathology, demonstrating its suitability for studying gene family evolution on a fine scale to uncover evolutionary events in the genome associated with the evolution of phenotypic traits important for host interactions.
Keywords: Colletotrichum acutatum, evolution, fungal lifestyle, pathogenicity, anthracnose
BIOLOGY OF THE C. acutatum SPECIES COMPLEX
Many species of the genus Colletotrichum are associated with plant diseases commonly known as anthracnose. Colletotrichum spp. can infect a wide range of hosts and are characterized by a global distribution. Virtually every cultivated botanical family is susceptible to one or more species of Colletotrichum, making it one of the most studied plant pathogenic fungi. Common hosts include many dicotyledonous plants, such as strawberries, apples, citrus fruits, and stone fruits, as well as major cereals like maize and sorghum. Members of this genus can cause crop losses of up to 100% in many staple foods.
Colletotrichum species employ a broad diversity of approaches to colonize and obtain nutrients from their hosts, ranging from biotrophs, necrotrophs, hemibiotrophs to endophytes, among others. Several Colletotrichum species are well-known as models for studying hemibiotrophy. Hemibiotrophs initially infect through a brief biotrophic phase, which is associated with the production of large intracellular primary hyphae that can infect host cells without causing cell death. Later, they switch to a necrotrophic phase during which narrower secondary hyphae are produced that spread throughout the host tissue, causing necrotic lesions. The scientific community has long studied the biomolecular processes that regulate this lifestyle, especially those related to the switch from biotrophy to necrotrophy.
The genus Colletotrichum has undergone frequent taxonomic changes in recent decades, with the merging and addition of many species. Species concepts are still in a state of flux; however, several major monophyletic clades, or species complexes, are now recognized. A recent study provides an account of the 189 currently accepted species, subdivided into 11 species complexes and 23 singleton species. Colletotrichum acutatum was identified by Simmonds and validated by the same author. Since then, a growing number of fungi have been assigned to C. acutatum, either based on the identification of new species or on the reclassification of other species, mostly from C. gloeosporioides, that show a high morphological similarity and an overlapping spectrum of hosts. In fact, while approximately 7% of the scientific literature dealing with Colletotrichum during a 10-year period from 1991 to 2000 addressed C. acutatum, this proportion rose to 18% in the following decade, depicting C. acutatum as a prominent entity.
Diversity among C. acutatum isolates has long been recognized, showing up to 4% variability in the rDNA-ITS sequences. However, comparisons to neighboring taxa clearly suggest this is a monophyletic group. Several intra-specific groupings have been established within C. acutatum based on morphological, physiological, sexual, and molecular data. These groupings were compiled into eight groups (A1–A8) based on rDNA-ITS and β-tubulin 2 (TUB2) sequence analyses. To date, 34 species are accepted and comprise what is now known as the C. acutatum species complex. Species complexes are informal designations widely used in the genus Colletotrichum to aggregate the increasing number of described species, recognizing monophyletic sub-generic groups. The number of species is expected to rise due to high genetic variability within the system and an increasing number of population studies uncovering strains that do not fit previously described species. The designation of infrageneric categories to accommodate what are now considered species complexes in Colletotrichum would help avoid confusion, such as between C. acutatum s.l. and C. acutatum s.s. These 34 species cluster in five clades, two of which display narrow diversity (clades 3 and 4), while the other three contain at least eight species each. Clades 2 and 5 encompass the largest genetic diversity within the C. acutatum species complex.
Members of the C. acutatum species complex have been well-documented from agricultural and natural hosts worldwide. The species complex exhibits a very wide host range. Meta-analyses reveal that C. acutatum s.l. strains are associated with infections on hundreds of species from more than 90 genera of plants, including monocotyledons and dicotyledons, as well as Pinophyta and Pteridophyta. They have also been linked to at least two insect species and, in a few cases, to marine ecosystems. There appears to be little to no evidence of co-evolution between host and pathogen. This is especially true in cultivated fruit systems, such as strawberry and olive, which are susceptible to many members of the species complex. Although the C. acutatum species complex is regarded as polyphagous, the lupin anthracnose pathogen has been shown to form a well-defined, homogeneous, and host-specific group, unlike other heterogeneous and polyphagous groups. A similar situation applies to safflower (Carthamus tinctorius), where only strains belonging to C. chrysanthemi were pathogenic. Strains that are genetically very close but belong to different species were not pathogenic on the same host. Other members of the species complex that show a strong relationship with a specific host include C. phormii, which is pathogenic to Phormium spp., a monocot native to New Zealand, and C. tamarilloi, the causal agent of tamarillo (Solanum betaceum) anthracnose. The lifestyles employed by members of the C. acutatum species complex depend on many factors, including the host, the host tissue infected, and the environment.
For example, on apples (Malus domestica), members of the C. acutatum species complex cause necrotic lesions of fruits but do not cause any symptoms on leaves. On sweet orange, the pathogen acts as a necrotroph on flowers and as a biotroph on leaves. On olive, at least six Colletotrichum species are associated with anthracnose, most frequently C. nymphaeae, C. godetiae, and C. acutatum. Upon penetration of mature fruits, these species have a short biotrophic phase represented by multi-lobed primary hyphae, followed by an extended necrotrophic stage, leading to disease symptoms. On olive leaves and branches, the fungus is most frequently asymptomatic but capable of epiphytic growth.
Colletotrichum nymphaeae is also an entomopathogen infecting the citrus orthezia scale insect, Praelongorthezia praelonga, while C. fioriniae is pathogenic toward the insect Fiorinia externa. On some fruits, such as apple and blueberry (Vaccinium spp.), members of the C. acutatum species complex cause both pre-harvest and post-harvest diseases. On these plants, asymptomatic, quiescent infections occur on unripe fruit and begin to develop necrotic lesions as the fruit ripens. There are many other examples of post-harvest decays on fruits such as peaches (Prunus persica), almonds (Prunus dulcis), avocado (Persea americana), mango (Mangifera indica), papaya (Carica papaya), and guava (Psidium guajava) that develop from quiescent infections that began in the field.
Sexual reproduction has been identified in some Colletotrichum species, but for most of them, only the anamorph is known. In vitro analyses have demonstrated that some C. acutatum species are heterothallic, requiring two strains of opposite mating types to complete the sexual cycle, while others are homothallic, capable of sexual reproduction without a second strain. Phylogenetic analyses also suggest a strong relationship between monophyletic lineages and mating behavior.
In this case, a hypothetical homothallic ancestor and two lineage-specific events are observed: the first being the acquisition of heterothallic capability in specific lineages and the second being the complete loss of mating behavior in others. Thus, Colletotrichum acutatum s.l. serves as a suitable system for studying the genetic bases of fungal mating systems and the effect of sexual behavior on genome architecture, ecological adaptation, and host association patterns. Colletotrichum acutatum s.l. also exhibits a worldwide geographic distribution. Strains belonging to these taxa are present in diverse climatic zones globally. Although different geographic areas exhibit particular trends in population distribution, a strong connection between genetic groups or populations and their distribution has not yet been demonstrated. However, results from previous studies suggest Oceania as the possible origin of this complex, particularly clade 5. This region shows the highest level of variability, with strains closely related to a hypothetical ancestral population primarily found in Australia and New Zealand. The low genetic variability of clade 1, along with the presence of all strains that cannot be assigned to designated species, may reflect an ongoing speciation process. Clade 1 likely originated in South America, as this geographic origin displays the highest diversity within the clade, and more genetic groups and species are being described from this area. Interestingly, only C. lupini, a member of clade 1, has spread globally over the past few decades, while all other reports are mainly confined to South America. It is tempting to speculate on a cause-effect relationship between the capacity of a specific population to infect lupins and its worldwide spread, especially considering that C. lupini is a seed-borne pathogen. Clade 4 is solely represented by C. acutatum sensu stricto, identified by Simmonds in 1965 in Australia as the species holotype. The populations clustering in this taxon exhibit limited diversity, but they can nonetheless be found on a relatively large number of hosts predominantly in Oceania and Africa. Recently, this fungus has emerged as a pathogen associated with olive anthracnose, along with C. nymphaeae and C. godetiae, in several Mediterranean countries, suggesting shifts in pathogen populations at a global scale. The general evolutionary trend emerging in the C. acutatum species complex appears to indicate distinct populations undergoing clear changes in their host-association patterns. This may suggest a role of switching in mating behavior and changes in host association patterns. The occurrence of heterothallism seems to have influenced host range diversity. In contrast, isolates capable of homothallism, such as C. salicis and C. phormii, exhibit a narrow range of hosts. The evolutionary trend suggests that the capacity of populations to exchange genetic information leads to rearrangements at the genomic level, increasing genome plasticity and the host spectrum of this pathogen.
Colletotrichum Genomics: Genome sequences for 28 species of Colletotrichum have been published in recent years, and comparative genomic studies have focused on genes associated with pathogenicity, host specialization, transitions in lifestyle between biotrophy and necrotrophy, and more recently, between endophytic and parasitic lifestyles. Comparative analyses of secretomes have revealed that the majority of predicted secreted proteins possess enzymatic activity, many of which are candidate effectors.
The host range of Colletotrichum spp. appears to be associated with gene loss or gain in families such as those encoding carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes) and proteases. In particular, gene families encoding proteases and carbohydrate-degrading enzymes are highly expanded in Colletotrichum compared to other Sordariomycetes, suggesting an increased importance of these gene families in Colletotrichum spp. infection processes. Transcriptional profiling experiments have also revealed that CAZymes, along with other classes of secreted proteins, are highly modulated during the infection process, further implicating them as important players in pathogenicity. Another important feature that has emerged from comparative studies is that lifestyle and host preference are not correlated with phylogenetic relationships. A comparison of the genomes of the endophyte C. tofieldiae and the closely related pathogen C. incanum revealed that the transition to an endophytic lifestyle was associated with a reduction in the number of predicted effectors and an expansion in chitin-binding and secondary metabolism-related proteins. In contrast, relatively distantly related members of the C. acutatum and C. gloeosporioides species complexes have strikingly similar repertoires of carbohydrate-active enzymes and secreted proteases. This observation suggests that these gene families evolved recently and independently in these two phylogenetically separated lineages. Further comparative analyses of the C. acutatum species complex genomes revealed that necrosis and ethylene-inducing peptide 1-like proteins were twice as abundant as in the other fungi studied. The large number of these genes associated with leaf necrosis and immunity-related responses in dicotyledonous plants would make the C. acutatum species complex a model system to study their evolution and biological role.
Recently, the genomes of more than 20 Colletotrichum species have been sequenced, revealing a tremendous diversity in genome architecture and gene content. While most studies focused on comparisons of distantly related lineages, they also demonstrate the need for higher resolution taxonomic sampling to better understand the evolution of fungal genomes and their possible associations with phenotypic characters such as host range, pathogenic lifestyle, and reproductive strategy. In this context, the C. acutatum species complex serves as a valuable model system, offering a variety of evolutionary closely related lineages with different phenotypic characteristics. The switch between mono and dicotyledonous hosts that occurred in clade 5 illustrates this point. Comparative genomics and transcriptomics of late-diverging species adapted to different hosts could help us understand the genomic bases involved in this host switch. Another example is provided by the host specialization of certain lineages to specific hosts, such as C. lupini. The biological diversity of the C. acutatum species complex and the presence of very closely related species with varying characteristics—such as host range and mating behavior—make C. acutatum a suitable model for investigating genomic signatures associated with changes in important phenotypic traits of fungal plant pathogens.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sequences for the genes used for phylogenetic analyses (ITS, GAPDH, CHS-1, HIS3, ACT, TUB2) were retrieved from public databases. Multiple sequence alignments were performed with MAFFT v. 7.304, which were then exported to MEGA7, where best-fit substitution models were calculated for each separate sequence dataset. The multilocus concatenated alignment was performed with Geneious 10.2.21. A Markov Chain Monte Carlo algorithm was employed to generate phylogenetic trees with Bayesian probabilities using MrBayes for the combined sequence alignment. Models of nucleotide substitution for each gene, determined by MEGA7, were used for each locus. The analysis in MrBayes ran for 5 million generations to achieve a P-value lower than 0.01, utilizing two parallel searches with three heated and one cold Markov chain, sampling every 100 generations and discarding 25% of the generations as burn-in.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS: All authors listed have made substantial, direct, and intellectual contributions to the work and approved it for publication. RB and PT drafted the manuscript; FP, SS, GLF, and MT critically revised and improved the manuscript.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: This research was supported by grants from the Ministerio de Economia y Competitividad (MINECO) of
Characterization of Colletotrichum isolates from tamarillo, passiflora, and mango in Colombia and identification of a unique species from the genus. Agostini, J. P., Timmer, L. W., and Mitchell, D. J. (1992). Morphological and pathological characteristics of strains of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides from citrus. Alkan, N., Friedlander, G., Ment, D., Prusky, D., and Fluhr, R. (2015). Simultaneous transcriptome analysis of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides and tomato fruit pathosystem reveals novel fungal pathogenicity and fruit defense strategies. Alkan, N., Meng, X., Friedlander, G., Reuveni, E., Sukno, S., Sherman, A., et al. (2013). Global aspects of pacC regulation of pathogenicity genes in Colletotrichum gloeosporioides as revealed by transcriptome analysis. Bailey, J. A., and Jeger, M. J. (1992). Colletotrichum: Biology, Pathology and Control. Baroncelli, R. (2012). Colletotrichum acutatum sensu lato: From Diversity Study to Genome Analysis. Ph.D. dissertation, University of Warwick, Coventry.
Baroncelli et al. (2016) discuss gene family expansions and contractions associated with host range in plant pathogens of the genus Colletotrichum. The draft genome sequence of Colletotrichum sublineola, a destructive pathogen of cultivated sorghum, was reported by Baroncelli et al. (2014a). Additionally, Baroncelli et al. (2015a) characterized and studied the epidemiology of Colletotrichum acutatum sensu lato causing anthracnose in Carthamus tinctorius. They also published a draft genome sequence of Colletotrichum acutatum sensu lato (Colletotrichum fioriniae) in 2014. Furthermore, molecular diversity studies by Baroncelli et al. (2015b) revealed multiple introductions of different Colletotrichum species in UK strawberry production. Bergstrom and Nicholson (1999) emphasized the importance of understanding corn anthracnose for better management strategies. Bragança et al. (2016) investigated species of the Colletotrichum acutatum complex linked to anthracnose diseases of fruit in Brazil.
Colletotrichum – current status and future directions.
Carvajal, F., and Edgerton, C. W. (1944). The perfect stage of Colletotrichum falcatum. Phytopathology, 34, 206–213.
Chattaoui, M., Raya, M. C., Bouri, M., Moral, J., Perez-Rodriguez, M., Trapero, A., et al. (2016). Characterization of a Colletotrichum population causing anthracnose disease on olive in northern Tunisia. J. Appl. Microbiol., 120, 1368–1381.
Crous, P. W., Wingfield, M. J., Guarro, J., Hernández-Restrepo, M., Sutton, D. A., Acharya, K., et al. (2015). Fungal Planet description sheets: 320–370. Persoonia, 34, 167–266.
Damm, U., Cannon, P. F., Woudenberg, J. H., and Crous, P. W. (2012). The Colletotrichum acutatum species complex. Stud. Mycol., 73, 37–113.
de Silva, D. D., Ades, P. K., Crous, P. W., and Taylor, P. W. J. (2017). Colletotrichum species associated with chili anthracnose in Australia. Plant Pathol., 66, 254–
Colletotrichum species associated with cultivated citrus in China. Fungal Diversity 61, 61–74. Jayawardena, R. S., Hyde, K. D., Damm, U., Cai, L., Liu, M., Li, X. H., et al. (2016). Notes on currently accepted species of Colletotrichum. Mycosphere 7, 1192–1260. Jones, A. L., Ehret, G. R., Meyer, M. P., and Shane, W. W. (1996). Occurrence of bitter rot on apple in Michigan. Plant Disease 80, 1294–1297. Katoh, K., and Standley, D. M. (2013). MAFFT multiple sequence alignment software version 7: improvements in performance and usability. Molecular Biology and Evolution 30, 772–780. Kearse, M., Moir, R., Wilson, A., Stones-Havas, S., Cheung, M., Sturrock, S., et al. (2012). Geneious Basic: an integrated and extendable desktop software platform for the organization and analysis of sequence data. Bioinformatics 28, 1647–1649. Kleemann, J., Rincon-Rivera, L. J., Takahara, H., Neumann, U., Ver Loren van Themaat, E., van der Does, H. C., et al. (2012). Sequential delivery of host-induced virulence effectors by appressoria and intracellular hyphae of the phytopathogen Colletotrichum higginsianum. PLOS Pathogens 8
. Kumar, S., Stecher, G., and Tamura, K. (2016). MEGA7: Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis version 7.0 for bigger datasets. Molecular Biology and Evolution 33, 1870–1874. Latunde-Dada, A. O. (2001). Colletotrichum: tales of forcible entry, stealth, transient confinement, and breakout. Molecular Plant Pathology 2, 187–198. LoBuglio, K. F., and Pfister, D. H. (2008). A Glomerella species phylogenetically related to Colletotrichum acutatum on Norway maple in Massachusetts. Mycologia 100, 710–715. Manire, C. A., Rhinehart, H. L., Sutton, D. A., Thomson, E. H., Rinaldi, M. G., Buck, J. D., et al. (2002). Disseminated mycotic infection caused by Colletotrichum acutatum in a Kemp's ridley sea turtle (Lepidochelys kempi). Journal of Clinical Microbiology 40, 4273–4
Prusky, D., Alkan, N., Mengiste, T., and Fluhr, R. (2013). Quiescent and necrotrophic lifestyle choice during postharvest disease development. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 51, 155–176. Prusky, D., Freeman, S., and Dickman, M. B. (eds) (2000). Colletotrichum: Host Specificity, Pathology, and Host-Pathogen Interaction. St. Paul, MN: APS Press, 393. Queiroz, C. B., de Correia, H. L. N., Menicucci, R. P., Vidigal, P. M. P., and de Queiroz, M. V. (2017). Draft genome sequences of two isolates of Colletotrichum lindemuthianum, the causal agent of anthracnose in common beans. Genome Announc. 5, e00214-17. Redman, R. S., Dunigan, D. D., and Rodriguez, R. J. (2001). Fungal symbiosis: from mutualism to parasitism, who controls the outcome, host or invader? New Phytol. 151, 705–716. Rodriguez, R., and Redman, R. (2008). More than 400 million years of evolution and some plants still can’t make it on their own: plant stress tolerance via fungal symbiosis. J. Exp. Bot. 59, 1109–1111. Ronquist, F., and Huelsenbeck, J. P. (2003). MRBAYES 3: Bayesian phylogenetic inference under mixed models. Bioinformatics 19, 1572–1574. Sanz-Martín, J. M., Pacheco-Arjona, J. R., Bello-Rico, V., Vargas, W. A., Monod, M., Díaz-Mínguez, J. M., et al. (2016). A highly conserved metalloprotease effector enhances virulence in the maize anthracnose fungus Colletotrichum graminicola. Mol. Plant Pathol. 17, 1048–1062. Sato, T., and Moriwaki, J. (2013). Re-classification of the Colletotrichum acutatum group A2 and A4 and re-identification of strains belonging to the groups in Japan. Plant Prot. 67, 367–372. Shi, Y. L., Correll, J. C., and Guerber, J. C. (1996). Frequency of Colletotrichum species causing bitter rot of apple in the southeastern United States. Plant Dis. 80, 692–696. Simmonds, J. H. (1965). A study of the species of Colletotrichum causing ripe fruit rots in Queensland. Qld J. Agric. Anim. Sci. 22, 437–459. Simmonds, J. H. (1968). Type specime
Talhinhas, P., Neves-Martins, J., Oliveira, H., and Sreenivasaprasad, S. (2009). The distinctive population structure of Colletotrichum species associated with olive anthracnose in the Algarve region of Portugal reflects a host-pathogen diversity hot spot. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. 296, 31–38.
Talhinhas, P., Sreenivasaprasad, S., Neves-Martins, J., and Oliveira, H. (2005). Molecular and phenotypic analyses reveal the association of diverse Colletotrichum acutatum groups and a low level of C. gloeosporioides with olive anthracnose. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 71, 2987–2998.
Thon, M. R., Nuckles, E. M., Takach, J. E., and Vaillancourt, L. J. (2002). CPR1: a gene encoding a putative signal peptidase that functions in the pathogenicity of Colletotrichum graminicola to maize. Mol. Plant Microbe Interact. 15, 120–128.
Vargas, W. A., Martín, J. M., Rech, G. E., Rivera, L. P., Benito, E. P., Díaz-Mínguez, J. M., et al. (2012). Plant defense mechanisms are activated during biotrophic and necrotrophic development of Colletotricum graminicola in maize. Plant Physiol. 158, 1342–1358.
Wharton, P. S., and Diéguez-Uribeondo, J. (2004). The biology of Colletotrichum acutatum. An. Jard. Bot. Madr. 61, 3–22.
Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. Copyright © 2017 Baroncelli, Talhinhas, Pensec, Sukno, Le Floch and Thon. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution, or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution, or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
The Colletotrichum acutatum Species Complex as a Model System to Study Evolution and Host Specialization in Plant Pathogens
Biology of the C. acutatum Species Complex
Colletotrichum Genomics
The C. acutatum Species Complex as a Model to Study the Evolution of Plant Pathogens
Materials and Methods
Author Contributions
Acknowledgments
Supplementary Material
References
