The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) strawberry breeding program is in its 69th consecutive year. Although not the oldest program in the United States, it is the longest continuous program. The USDA strawberry breeding program began in 1920, with George M. Darrow in charge. Darrow conducted a survey from 1914 to 1917 of the commercial strawberry regions of the United States and identified serious deficiencies in the quality of berries for various markets. He outlined more than 30 characteristics for evaluation but focused on three specific areas for immediate work: 1) the development of a superior dessert berry for the eastern states; 2) the creation of satisfactory canning types; and 3) the development of cultivars suitable for preservation by freezing. During the 1920s, more than 130 strawberry cultivars and 20 selections of Fragaria species were utilized in the breeding work, with 44 of these parents being of European origin. Thousands of seedlings were evaluated, leading to the naming of several cultivars. The two most significant were ‘Blakemore’ and ‘Fairfax.’ ‘Blakemore’ quickly became a leading cultivar, setting the standard for firmness that allowed for successful long-distance shipment of fruit. It demonstrated wide adaptability in the southern and south-central U.S. regions and is still commercially grown in some areas. ‘Blakemore,’ ‘Fairfax,’ and other USDA selections such as 253, 543, and 634 from this early work became widely used as parents in other breeding programs, particularly ‘Fairfax’ due to its excellent fruit quality and leaf spot resistance.
While under Darrow's direction, formal cooperative work began with state experiment stations in North Carolina and Oregon in 1928, and Maryland in 1937. Other informal cooperative efforts were initiated with New Jersey, New York, and Massachusetts. Between 1920 and 1940, studies were conducted on sterility, fertility, inflorescence types, and response to light. Darrow provided excellent summaries of early USDA and other public and private strawberry breeding efforts. The incorporation of the flavor and aroma of the diploid F. vesca L. into the cultivated strawberry F. ×ananassa Duch. was also investigated. Tetraploid F. vesca selections were developed and used in additional crosses. Decaploids derived from this work were fertile and could be intercrossed to produce fertile seedlings with the characteristic F. vesca aroma; however, they have not played a role in the development of modern cultivars. In 1932, strawberry breeding was relocated from Glenn Dale, Maryland, to Beltsville, Maryland, where it continues today. A root disease became evident in several states during the 1930s and was also found on the Beltsville station grounds. This disease, identified as Phytophthora fragariae Hickman (red stele), became a serious issue in the East.
H O R TS C I E N C E , VO L. 25(8), AU G U S T 1 9 9 0
In the Pacific Northwest, screenings for resistance were initially conducted in infested fields. However, Waldo (1953), who joined the USDA strawberry program in 1926 and was in charge of breeding in Corvallis, Oregon, since 1932, demonstrated that young seedlings could be screened in benches of infested soil within greenhouses. This method significantly increased the number of seedlings that could be tested. Resistance to red stele became a primary objective of the USDA breeding program, leading to the release of ‘Temple’ in 1943 as the first cultivar bred with resistance to the disease. The development of cultivars resistant to P. fragariae has required extensive research due to the presence of physiologic races of the organism (Converse and Scott, 1962; Scott et al., 1984). The history, breeding, and inheritance studies of red stele have been discussed in several papers (Scott et al., 1962; Scott and Lawrence, 1975) and in a more comprehensive review by Scott et al. (1984). Important sources of resistance to the disease have been identified from F. chiloensis (L.) Duch. clones collected by Waldo (Scott et al., 1984); these clones are recognized as ‘Del Norte’ and ‘Yaquina’ (Converse, 1970). Subsequently, two distinct clones of ‘Yaquina’ were identified, A and B. Yaquina A has served as one of the primary clones for resistance in race testing (Converse, 1970). Since the development of cultivars resistant to red stele has been a primary objective of the USDA program, various resistant cultivars have been introduced, including ‘Surecrop’, ‘Midway’, ‘Sunrise’, ‘Guardian’, ‘Earliglow’, and more recently, ‘Scott’, ‘Allstar’, ‘Lester’, and ‘Lateglow’. In the Pacific Northwest, Waldo introduced ‘Siletz’ in 1955, the first red stele-resistant strawberry for this region. Since then, two other important red stele-resistant cultivars—Hood and Benton—have emerged from the cooperative USDA-Oregon State strawberry breeding program. Additionally, the first day-neutral cultivars with multiple resistances to red stele, ‘Tristar’ and ‘Tribute’, were released from Beltsville in 1981 (Galletta et al., 1981).
Virus tolerance is critical in the Pacific Northwest, where strawberry plantings are maintained for several years and large populations of aphid vectors exist alongside the virus complex. ‘Marshall’, which was for many years the leading cultivar in the Pacific Northwest, was extremely virus-susceptible and has been replaced by tolerant cultivars such as ‘Totem’, ‘Benton’, and ‘Siletz’. The germplasm for virus tolerance in cultivars such as ‘Siletz’ and ‘Benton’ was developed through Waldo’s program for selecting vigorous clones in the field under highly infective conditions. The basis of tolerance is primarily derived from F. chiloensis (L.) Duch. (Miller and Waldo, 1959). In the eastern United States, virus tolerance has not been a significant factor in breeding work, although the USDA played a crucial role in introducing virus-free stocks into the nursery program and maintaining these stocks (Galletta et al., 1981). Demaree and Marcus found that most strawberry stocks were infected with viruses that weakened plants (Demaree and Marcus, 1951). The introduction of virus-free stocks by the USDA stabilized the cultivar situation, which is a vital factor in strawberry breeding and for the commercial strawberry industry.
The screening of selections and cultivars for resistance to verticillium wilt [Verticillium albo-atrum (Reinke & Berth.) and V. dahliae Kleb.] was initiated by Scott in the late 1950s (Varney et al., 1959) using field plots infested with the organism. More recently, seedlings, selections, and cultivars have been evaluated for resistance using mycelium suspensions and sand benches, similar to red stele evaluations (Galletta et al., 1981). One of the latest USDA releases, ‘Lateglow’, is highly resistant to verticillium wilt.
The USDA Small Fruit Research Laboratory in Poplarville, Mississippi, along with cooperators in North Carolina, Florida, and Louisiana, is screening strawberry seedlings for resistance to anthracnose (Colletotrichum sp.). Anthracnose is a destructive disease affecting the southern and south-central United States, attacking both the plant and fruit. Several species of fungi may be involved (Maas, 1984). A screening method developed at the USDA laboratory in Mississippi has identified two clones, MSUS 73 and MSUS 74, as strongly resistant to anthracnose crown rot, with yields comparable to standard cultivars. These clones also exhibit superior internal fruit color. Additionally, several selections from North Carolina, such as ‘NC 3874’ and ‘NC 3892’, demonstrate resistance to both anthracnose and red stele.
In the eastern United States, diseases such as leaf spot (Mycosphaerella fragariae), leaf scorch (Diplocarpon earliana), and leaf blight (Phomopsis obscurans) can be highly destructive, making resistance a key objective in cooperative work with Maryland and North Carolina, as well as at the USDA-Southern Illinois University Experiment Station in Carbondale until its closure in 1972. The cultivars ‘Blakemore’ and ‘Fairfax’ have inherited resistance to foliage diseases from ‘Howard 17’ and have passed this resistance on to their progeny (Parrow, 1966). Selection for resistance has continued, with work at Carbondale beginning in 1959 under the guidance of R.C. Blake, leading to the release of ‘Delite’, which is resistant to both leaf spot and leaf blight. Other USDA cultivars, including ‘Surecrop’, ‘Earliglow’, ‘Earlibelle’, ‘Scott’, and ‘Lester’, also show considerable resistance to these foliage diseases.
Strawberry breeding commenced at the Cheyenne Horticulture Field Station in Cheyenne, Wyoming, in 1937, with LiRoy Powers as the principal investigator. A major focus of this work was to study crosses between the winter-hardy native Rocky Mountain strawberry (F. virginiana glauca) and cultivated varieties (Powers, 1945). More winter hardiness was necessary in cultivated types, and work continued under G. Howard until the station closed in 1975. Eight cultivars were introduced from this research, the last being ‘Fort Laramie’, a hardy everbearing type. ‘Ogalalla’, also winter-hardy, was introduced in 1956 and is still cultivated in limited areas with low temperatures.
A labor crisis in the 1960s in the Pacific Northwest spurred interest in breeding strawberry cultivars suitable for machine harvesting. Part of the cooperative USDA-Oregon State Experiment Station project focused on this goal, including collaboration with the Oregon State University Agriculture Engineering Department, which developed the harvesting and capping equipment. Selection of strawberries with an erect fruiting habit, simultaneous ripening of most fruit, and easy capping—important traits for machine harvesting—is feasible due to the variability in existing strawberry germplasm. Inheritance patterns for simultaneous fruit ripening showed that early season parents, such as ‘Sunrise’, could yield progeny with a high percentage of the crop ripening at once (Lawrence et al., 1975). Semi-erect and easy-capping types could also be derived from parents like ‘Hood’, ‘Benton’, and other selections from the Pacific Northwest and California. Moreover, selections that produce over 80% of the fruit ripe simultaneously and possess easy-capping characteristics could have good processing qualities (Lawrence et al., 1975).
The cultivar ‘Linn’ was introduced in 1975 as a machine-harvest processing berry; however, commercial machine harvesting did not materialize, and ‘Linn’ fell out of favor because it does not maintain berry size as the plants age and is too tart for the fresh market. Currently, machine harvesting of strawberries for the commercial processing industry remains at an experimental stage in the
Four federal locations were involved in the past 69 years of strawberry breeding, but only one, Beltsville, remains as a USDA location with an active program. Carbondale closed in 1972, Cheyenne in 1975, and the work at Corvallis is being redirected. After Darrow retired in 1957, Scott assumed the work at Beltsville until he retired in 1975. Arlen Draper was the strawberry breeder until 1977, when G.J. Galletta became the principal breeder. Galletta has continued an extensive cooperative program with various states, including Wisconsin, Maryland, North Carolina, Florida, New York, New Jersey, Missouri, Maine, and Minnesota. The USDA breeding work has produced some promising selections from this cooperative effort, including ‘NC 3874’ and ‘NC 3892’ for the coastal plain of North Carolina; ‘MDUS 4787’, ‘MDUS 5122’, ‘MDUS 5130’, ‘NJ 8123-5’, and ‘NJ 8219-2’ for the Mid-Atlantic and Midwest; and, for the North, hardy selections such as ‘MNUS 99’, ‘MNUS 52’, ‘MNUS 37’, ‘NY 113’, ‘WIUS 8284’, and ‘WI 8289’. New day-neutral selections (‘EB 411’, ‘EB 457’, and ‘EB 460’) with multiple disease resistance also show promise. The USDA strawberry breeding program started with clear, definable objectives to originate cultivars adapted to the environmental conditions existing in different regions and still maintains these objectives.
Literature Cited: Converse, R.H. 1970. Occurrence of Phytophthora fragariae race A-10 in California. Plant Dis. Rptr. 54:969-971. Converse, R.H. and D.H. Scott. 1962. Physiologic specialization in Phytophthora fragariae. Phytopathology 52:802-807. Darrow, G.M. 1937. Breeding small fruits; strawberry improvement. U.S. Dept. of Agr. Yrbk. of Agr., 1937. p. 445-495. Darrow, G.M. 1962. Fairfax strawberry--its origin and use in breeding. Fruit Var. J. 16:23-25. Darrow, G.M. 1966. The strawberry—history, breeding, and physiology. Holt, Rinehart, and Winston, New York. Darrow, G.M., G.F. Waldo, and C.E. Schuster. 1933. Twelve years of strawberry breeding. J. Hered. 24:391-402. Darrow, G.M., G.F. Waldo, C.E. Schuster, and B.S. Pickett. 1934. Twelve years of strawberry breeding, II. J. Hered. 25:450-462. Demaree, J.B. and C.P. Marcus. 1951. Virus diseases of strawberries in the United States, with special reference to distribution, indexing, and insect vectors in the east. Plant Dis. Rptr. 35:527-537. Dermen, H. and G.M. Darrow. 1938. Colchicine-induced tetraploid and 16-ploid strawberries. Proc. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sci. 36:300-301. Galletta, G.J., A.D. Draper, and D.H. Scott. 1981. The U.S. Department of Agriculture strawberry breeding program. HortScience 16:743-746. Lawrence, F.J., L.W. Martin, and G.W. Varseveld. 1975. Strawberry breeding and evaluation for mechanical harvesting. Ore. St. Agr. Ex
Sure, just provide the contents when you're ready!
