Plant Health Progress ¿ 2018 ¿ 19:338–341
Research
Widespread Resistance to QoI Fungicides of Colletotrichum acutatum from Strawberry Nurseries and Production Fields
Bruna B. Forcelini and Natalia A. Peres, University of Florida, Gulf Coast Research and Education Center, Wimauma, 33598
Accepted for publication 6 November 2018.
Abstract
Strawberry anthracnose, caused mainly by the Colletotrichum acutatum species complex, is a major disease in strawberry nurseries and production fields. The use of fungicides, such as the quinone outside inhibitors (QoIs), has been extensively deployed for the control of C. acutatum for the past 20 years. C. acutatum resistance to the QoIs was first reported in 2013 in Florida strawberry production fields. In 2015, anthracnose outbreaks were reported in strawberry nurseries and production fields across the United States. To elucidate the significance and geographical extension of C. acutatum resistance, fungicide use surveys were conducted, and isolates were collected in the affected areas. QoI-resistant isolates were collected from strawberry production fields and nurseries in six states in the United States. Fungicide use surveys indicated that, in some locations, the number of QoI applications exceeded the recommended guidelines for this fungicide group. Thus, the current situation warrants immediate changes in anthracnose management strategies that integrate both chemical and nonchemical approaches to limit resistant population selection and prevent future anthracnose outbreaks.
Strawberry anthracnose, caused by species in the Colletotrichum acutatum complex, primarily C. nymphaeae, is one of the main diseases limiting fruit yields in the United States. Characteristic symptoms of C. acutatum infections include flower blight and fruit rot. Flower infections may result in the appearance of brown lesions on infected petals, whereas fruit infections appear as dark, sunken lesions with orange mucilage on the surface, making the fruit undesirable for consumption. Under severe epidemics, crown and root infections can also occur in nurseries, leading to plant stunting and reduced fruit production. Although C. acutatum infections are commonly observed in strawberry production fields, it has been suggested that quiescently infected transplants originating from nurseries serve as the inoculum source for field infections.
In Florida, strawberries are treated as an annual crop and cultivated throughout the winter. During the off-season in summer, extreme hot temperatures in Florida are detrimental to the survival of C. acutatum present in the soil and plant debris. Strawberry transplants are produced in nurseries primarily located in northern latitudes, in Canada, or at higher altitudes in North Carolina and California. Low temperatures may limit disease development but do not eliminate the pathogen from strawberry transplants. Daughter plants originating from mother plants are propagated in nurseries and sold to strawberry growers or to smaller nurseries, which then propagate additional stock material. Because transplants are propagated vegetatively, pathogens such as C. acutatum may also be transmitted to newly formed plants. Upon arrival in strawberry production fields in Florida, quiescently infected transplants are exposed to weather conditions, such as prolonged wetness periods and temperatures between 20 and 30°C, that are ideal for C. acutatum infection and anthracnose development.
C. acutatum control is highly dependent on frequent and numerous applications of multi- and single-site fungicides. Multisite fungicides, such as captan, provide satisfactory control of C. acutatum but have no curative effect, necessitating weekly applications during the season. Single-site fungicides, such as the quinone outside inhibitors (QoIs), have a post-infection effect on anthracnose, but growers are limited to a small number of applications that can be made throughout the strawberry production season. Due to the few QoI applications permitted during the fruit production phase, the use of broad-spectrum multisite fungicides is recommended during the vegetative phase. However, to deliver symptom-free transplants, single-site fungicides have been frequently deployed in nurseries, leading to the selection of fungicide-resistant populations of Botrytis cinerea, another significant pathogen of strawberry. QoI fungicides target the cytochrome b (cytb) gene, inhibiting fungal mitochondrial respiration. Azoxystrobin is a QoI fungicide that has been registered for anthracnose control on strawberry for several decades. However, the intensive use of such fungicides has resulted in the selection of C. acutatum populations resistant to QoI fungicides. QoI resistance was first identified during the 2013 to 2014 strawberry production season in Florida. Resistant C. acutatum isolates exhibited either the F129L or G143A mutations in the cytb gene, associated with moderate and complete resistance to the QoIs, respectively. During the 2015 to 2016 strawberry season, anthracnose outbreaks were reported in strawberry nurseries and production fields throughout the United States. Thus, the objectives of this study were to (i) determine the sensitivity to azoxystrobin of C. acutatum isolates collected in strawberry nurseries and production fields from various geographical locations and (ii) survey the current disease management programs implemented in strawberry nurseries.
In total, 232 monoconidial isolates belonging to the C. acutatum species complex were isolated from anthracnose-affected strawberry organs and used in this study. Isolates were collected from strawberry plants in nurseries located in California and North Carolina, as well as from fruit production fields in California, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, North Carolina, and Virginia during the 2015 to 2016 strawberry production season. Nursery source information for isolates collected in fruit production fields was also gathered when available. Isolates were stored dry on filter paper inside a sterile envelope in an airtight container with Drierite at –20°C or in 30% sterile glycerol at –80°C. Isolate sensitivity to azoxystrobin was evaluated based on mycelial growth with two discriminatory doses of azoxystrobin (3 and 100 µg/ml). The commercial formulation of azoxystrobin was used for the fungicide sensitivity assays.
Salicylhydroxamic acid was not incorporated into the medium because Forcelini et al. (2016) reported that C. acutatum isolates from strawberry do not utilize an alternative respiration pathway. For isolate revival, a small piece of filter paper (approximately 4 mm²) or glycerol containing the isolate was placed on a 90-mm-diameter Petri plate with potato dextrose agar (PDA) (Oxoid, Basingstoke, U.K.) and grown for 7 days at 24°C under constant light. One 6-mm-diameter plug from the periphery of the colony was removed and placed on Petri plates containing either PDA, PDA + azoxystrobin (3 µg/ml), or PDA + azoxystrobin (100 µg/ml). Plates were sealed, and fungal colonies were incubated at 24°C under constant light for 3 days. Mycelial growth was determined as the average length of two radius measurements. Isolates were considered sensitive to azoxystrobin if mycelial growth inhibition on the medium amended with 3 µg/ml of azoxystrobin was 50% or greater compared to the control. If mycelial growth was not inhibited at 3 µg/ml of azoxystrobin but was inhibited at 100 µg/ml, the isolate was considered moderately resistant. Isolates that were not inhibited at 100 µg/ml were designated completely resistant. Three plates per fungicide concentration and two plates for the control treatments were used for each isolate. The experiment was conducted twice. Among the 232 C. acutatum isolates evaluated, 83 (36%) were resistant to azoxystrobin. All resistant isolates were considered completely resistant to azoxystrobin; that is, mycelial growth was not inhibited even when exposed to 100 µg/ml of azoxystrobin. Moreover, we found resistant isolates that originated from fruit, which differs from the first C. acutatum QoI resistance outbreak in Florida, where the majority of resistant isolates were collected from root and crown tissue (Forcelini et al. 2016). Isolates resistant to the QoIs were found in all six states. California nurseries and production fields were the origin of the majority of C. acutatum isolates (91) collected during the 2015 to 2016 season. Of the 91 isolates, 16 were resistant to azoxystrobin. Forty of the 52 isolates collected from fruit originating from production fields in Louisiana were also QoI resistant. Of the 40 resistant isolates, 36 originated from a nursery in California and four from a nursery in Canada. In Georgia, 23 isolates were collected, and 13 were considered resistant, whereas in Virginia, five of the 43 isolates were azoxystrobin resistant. In North Carolina, 14 isolates were collected, and five were resistant. Five isolates were collected from the University of Florida Gulf Coast Research and Education Center research field; four of those isolates were resistant.
Surveys were conducted from 2015 to 2017 to elucidate disease management programs implemented in 10 strawberry nurseries across the United States and Canada. Nurserymen were asked to answer a brief questionnaire on fungicide use during the plant.
Propagation season. The information gathered from the surveys was analyzed and separated into the following categories: nursery location (state or country), Fungicide Resistance Action Committee (FRAC) group, and number of applications per season. However, because we were only evaluating C. acutatum sensitivity to QoIs in this study, we focused only on the number of applications of products that contained QoIs as the main active ingredient or as part of a premixture. The majority of the nurseries surveyed followed the recommendations on the products’ labels and made five or fewer applications of QoI fungicides, such as azoxystrobin, pyraclostrobin, or premixtures containing QoIs. One nursery in California, one in North Carolina, and another in Canada sprayed QoI fungicides 10, 8, or 6 times, respectively, during one season. Among these applications, the nurseries indicated an alternation among azoxystrobin, pyraclostrobin, and the premix of pyraclostrobin + boscalid. With the isolate collection information (nursery of origin), the number of QoI sprays during the nursery phase and the number of resistant isolates may be correlated. The majority of plants harboring QoI-resistant isolates originated from nurseries whose spray programs exceeded the product’s recommendations, suggesting that there may be a link between nursery spray programs and the frequency of resistance.
C. acutatum resistance to QoI fungicides has become a widespread problem in American and Canadian strawberry nurseries and in fruit production fields. In this study, we present an ongoing program that monitors the sensitivity of C. acutatum from strawberry nurseries and production fields across the United States to azoxystrobin. Just as reported in Florida, lack of anthracnose control and high yield losses throughout the United States during the 2015 to 2016 season could be associated with the emergence of C. acutatum QoI-resistant populations. Nursery surveys confirmed the intensive use of QoI fungicides. Single-site fungicides such as the QoIs have been frequently used in nurseries to control anthracnose and other diseases and to deliver symptom-free stock material. In addition to commercial products containing only azoxystrobin or pyraclostrobin, premixtures containing QoI fungicides were also deployed. Thus, an increase in the selection rate for QoI-resistant populations has been observed as early as in the nursery phase. Because transplants produced in large nurseries are sold to smaller ones, plants may be exposed to multiple QoI applications in each phase of propagation. Consequently, during the fruit production phase, growers are faced with the challenge of controlling anthracnose outbreaks while having limited effective chemical options available. Multi- and single-site fungicide alternatives effective for the control of anthracnose in strawberry nurseries and production fields are urgently needed. An antifungal antibiotic, natamycin, which is widely used as a natural mold inhibitor in food products, has shown promise in controlling anthracnose root and crown infections caused by C. acutatum on strawberry transplants. Similarly, fluazinam, a single-site respiration inhibitor fungicide from FRAC group 29, has shown significant anthracnose fruit rot control. A request has been submitted through the Interregional...
Research Project Number 4 is registered for nursery usage only. Reducing the overlap of the same modes of action used during the nursery and fruit production phases may help increase the lifespan of single-site fungicides, which have a high risk of resistance. Additionally, even though the multisite fungicides captan, thiram, and chlorothalonil have been available for many decades, they remain effective in reducing the incidence of strawberry anthracnose (Mertely et al. 2018). Chlorothalonil is registered only for nonbearing nurseries, when flowers and fruit are not present. However, our surveys indicated that it has been significantly underused compared to the newer single-site fungicides. Given their efficacy and low risk of resistance, multisite fungicides should be the mainstay of disease control in strawberry nurseries. Other non-chemical alternatives, such as heat (Wang et al. 2017) and ultraviolet treatments (Onofre et al. 2017), are currently being investigated and should serve as tools to manage diseases and reduce the use of single-site fungicides. Overall, our results suggest that C. acutatum resistance to QoI fungicides is becoming a widespread issue in strawberry nurseries, with resistant isolates being disseminated to fruit production fields in various states. Instead of eradicating the inoculum present on transplants, frequent QoI applications select for resistant populations. Consequently, asymptomatic transplants carrying resistant isolates may serve as the inoculum source that leads to anthracnose outbreaks in production fields. This situation warrants immediate changes in anthracnose management programs, which should integrate non-chemical strategies with multisite and alternative single-site fungicides to limit selection and prevent the spread of QoI-resistant populations.
In the study, the number of applications of products with quinone outside inhibitors (QoIs) and the number of tested and resistant isolates per strawberry nursery were documented. The data was collected from various locations, including California and North Carolina, where the number of QoI applications ranged from 0 to 10. Each nursery's isolates were tested for resistance, with some nurseries reporting a significant percentage of resistant isolates, while others had no resistant isolates available for testing. In Canada, certain nurseries showed varying numbers of applications and resistance, indicating differing management practices.
Acknowledgments are extended to Barclay Poling, Kelly Ivors, and Guido Schnabel for providing some of the isolates for this study. We also thank Joe Noling for sharing information from fungicide use surveys.
Literature cited includes various studies and reports on strobilurin fungicides, Florida strawberry production, the Colletotrichum acutatum species complex, and research on anthracnose resistance in strawberry isolates, providing a comprehensive background for the ongoing investigation into strawberry disease management.
Natamycin is a new biofungicide for managing crown rot of strawberry caused by QoI-resistant Colletotrichum acutatum.
Howard, C. M., Maas, J., Chandler, C., and Albregts, E. (1992). Anthracnose of strawberry caused by the Colletotrichum complex in Florida. Plant Dis., 76: 976-981.
Legard, D. E., Ellis, M., Chandler, C. K., and Price, J. F. (2003). Integrated management of strawberry diseases in winter fruit production areas. Pages 111-124 in: The Strawberry: A Book for Growers. N. F. Childers, ed. Dr. Norman N. Childers Publications, Gainesville, FL.
Legard, D. E., and MacKenzie, S. J. (2003). Evaluation of fungicides to control anthracnose fruit rot of strawberry, 2001-02. Fungic. Nematicide Tests, 58
.
MacKenzie, S., and Peres, N. (2012). Use of leaf wetness and temperature to time fungicide applications to control anthracnose fruit rot of strawberry in Florida. Plant Dis., 96:522-528.
Mertely, J., Seijo, T., and Peres, N. A. (2018). Evaluation of products for anthracnose fruit rot and Gnomonia leaf blotch control in strawberry, 2016-2017. Plant Dis. Manage. Rep., 12
.
Mertely, J. C., Forcelini, B. B., and Peres, N. A. (2017a). Root necrosis of strawberry caused by Colletotrichum acutatum. Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences Extension, University of Florida, Wimauma, FL.
Mertely, J. C., Forcelini, B. B., and Peres, N. A. (2017b). Anthracnose fruit rot of strawberry. Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences Extension, University of Florida, Wimauma, FL.
Oliveira, M. S., Amiri, A., Zuniga, A. I., and Peres, N. A. (2017). Sources of primary inoculum of Botrytis cinerea and their impact on fungicide resistance development in commercial strawberry fields. Plant Dis., 101:1761-1768.
Onofre, R. B., Vieira, R. L., Arupillai, S., Stensvand, A., Gadoury, D. M., and Peres, N. A. (2017). Severity of strawberry powdery mildew in open field vs. under plastics that either block or transmit UV light. (Abstr.) Phytopathology, 107
.49.
Peres, N., Timmer, L., Adaskaveg, J., and Correll, J. (2005). Lifestyles of Colletotrichum acutatum. Plant Dis., 89:784-796.
Sauter, H., Steglich, W., and Anke, T. (1999). Strobilurins: Evolution of a new class of active substances. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 38:1328-1349.
Smith, B. J. (1998). Anthracnose fruit rot (black spot). Pages 31-33 in: *Compend
Widespread Resistance to QoI Fungicides of Colletotrichum acutatum from Strawberry Nurseries and Production Fields
Monitoring C. acutatum Sensitivity to Azoxystrobin in Nursery and Production Fields
Survey of Fungicide Use in Strawberry Nurseries
Concluding Remarks
Acknowledgments
Literature Cited
