Plant Disease 76n10_976.pdf
Charles M. Howard (deceased), University of Florida, Dover
John L. Maas, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Beltsville, MD
Craig K. Chandler and Earl E. Afbregts, University of Florida, Dover
Anthracnose of Strawberry Caused by the Colletotrichum Complex in Florida
Strawberries, perhaps the most delectable of fruits, are grown for their attractiveness and exquisite flavor in most temperate and many tropical areas of the world. Some feel the world would indeed be a dull place without the strawberry to perk up taste buds and enliven desserts and pastries. Strawberry growing can be traced back thousands of years. The origins of strawberry cultivation in Europe are well documented in literature and art. Fragaria vesca L. (diploid, 2n=14 chromosomes) and F. moschata (hexaploid, 2n=42 chromosomes) were cultivated in palace and church gardens.
Strawberry culture in the New World of North and South America is less well documented. North American natives appreciated the appearance of F. virginiana Duchesne (octaploid, 2n=56 chromosomes) fruit in spring, but this species apparently was not cultivated until Europeans began exploring and settling North America. However, native inhabitants of Chile and Peru had selected and cultivated superior variants of F. chiloensis (L.) Quebesne (octaploid, 2n=56 chromosomes) well before the arrival of the conquistadores in the 16th century.
The modern strawberry, Fragaria × ananassa Duchesne, is of relatively recent origin. Not until the North American F. virginiana and the South American F. chiloensis were brought together and hybridized in Europe around 1750 did the progenitor of the strawberry we know today come into being. The high degree of genetic heterozygosity in Fragaria spp. has enabled the development of strawberry cultivars adapted to widely varying environmental conditions and resistant to several diseases and pests. Available today are cultivars that can survive the bitterly cold winters of Alaska and others that perform well in the long, hot season of Pretoria, South Africa.
Although a minor crop, strawberries provide a major source of income for many fruit growers and nursery growers. Strawberries were grown on nearly 20,000 hectares in the United States in 1989. Total production for fresh market and processing use totaled 555,000 tons and was valued at $520 million. Florida is second only to California in the production of fresh-market strawberries. Strawberries for U.S. winter production (December through March) are grown on approx
The warm, humid climate of Florida allows for year-round growth of strawberry plants in nurseries and commercial fields, which is ideal for the development of various diseases, particularly anthracnose. This disease has become significant not only in Florida but also in other regions of North America and around the world. Given the importance of strawberry anthracnose in Florida and the increasing concern about the disease in other strawberry-producing areas, we present the history of its occurrence, the symptoms caused by the Colletotrichum complex in Florida, and control measures developed for strawberry growers in the state.
The term "anthracnose" was first used to describe a new disease of strawberries caused by Colletotrichum fragariae Brooks. "Strawberry anthracnose" has since been used as a general term for all diseases of strawberries caused by species of Colletotrichum. Strawberry anthracnose diseases have been linked to several species, including C. acutatum J.H. Simmonds, C. gloeosporioides (Penz.) Penz. & Sacc. (the teleomorph of Colletotrichum cingulatum (Stoneman) Spauld. & H. Schrenk), and C. dematium (Pers.) Grove. C. dematium only occasionally causes fruit rots and will not be discussed further here.
Anthracnose fungi can attack various plant parts, including crowns, petioles, leaves, fruit trusses, flowers, buds, and fruit. The fungi's ability to affect multiple parts of the plant, along with the involvement of several pathogenic species, contributes to the complexity of strawberry anthracnose. Brooks reported in 1931 that C. fragariae caused spotting and girdling of runners and later noted that it also caused spotting of petioles and crown rot in a summer nursery, leading to wilting and death of plants. Researchers in Louisiana confirmed these symptoms and reported that crown rot also occurred in fruit production fields. In 1972, Howard described a fruit rot in Florida caused by C. fragariae. Additionally, fruit rots attributed to anthracnose fungi have been reported in various other regions of the United States, such as Gloeosporium sp. in Maryland and C. acutatum in Ohio.
