COLLETOTRICHUM
Martin B. Dickman
University of Nebraska
Department of Plant Pathology
Lincoln, Nebraska 68583 USA
In addition, these fungi develop a series of specialized infection-related structures, including germ tubes, appressoria, primary intracellular hyphae, and secondary necrotrophic hyphae. Colletotrichum species are thus experimentally attractive organisms to study the molecular, biochemical, and cellular basis of fungal pathogenicity, development, and signal transduction (see Bailey and Jeger, 1992; Prusky et al., 1999). Despite significant developments over the last ten years, the taxonomy of Colletotrichum is in a state of flux. Many uncertainties exist in the systematics of fungal pathogens from this genus; depending on the taxonomic "guides," the number of species can range from 29 to over 700 (von Arx, 1957; Sutton, 1992). One of the most confusing species is C. gloeosporioides. For example, 594 species of Colletotrichum were reclassified by von Arx as synonyms of C. gloeosporioides. Identification has relied primarily on morphological characteristics of conidia, vegetative and sexual structures, and on host specificity and cultural characteristics (von Arx, 1957). Unfortunately, conidial morphology and colony characteristics vary even within isolates. Consequently, classical methods have been supplemented with biochemical and molecular technologies coupled with classical methods.
This review focuses on current research into the infection process of Colletotrichum species, with an overall emphasis on how signal transduction influences prepenetration morphogenesis, including conidiation, conidial attachment, conidial germination, germ tube formation, and appressorial differentiation. Post-penetration biotrophic and necrotrophic growth patterns will also be described. In addition, intriguing studies involving host specificity and chromosome transfer will be summarized.
Complementation of genes in model organisms is a powerful technique for characterizing signaling protein function. Two notable signaling proteins from fungal plant pathogens that complement defects in "tester" organisms are the tb3 protein kinase gene from C. trifolii (Buhr et al., 1996) and the PMK1 MAP kinase gene from M. grisea (Xu and Hamer, 1996). The TB3 kinase complemented the colonial phenotype in N. crassa (due to disruption of the cot-1 protein kinase gene), and PMK1 complemented a mating defect in S. cerevisiae (due to deletion of the FUS1/KSS1 MAP kinase genes). A serine/threonine kinase gene (elk1) expressed by C. lindemuthianum and required for pathogenicity on P. vulgaris has been identified by insertional mutagenesis (Dufresne et al., 1998). The gene is constitutively expressed, but the mutant cannot penetrate. Mutants in C. graminicola with unpigmented spores or weakened cell walls have recently been identified by restriction enzyme-mediated integration (REMI) (Epstein et al., 1998). Developmentally regulated proteins in C. lindemuthianum have been identified and characterized with monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) (Green et al., 1995). Mabs were raised either to homogenates of germlings grown in liquid culture (Pain et al., 1992) or to infection structures isolated from bean leaves (Pain et al., 1994a, b). Recently, one of these Mabs (UB25) was used as a probe for expression cloning, and a gene was isolated encoding a fungal glycoprotein present at the biotrophic interface in host cells (Perfect et al., 1998).
