A Special Interest Group meeting on Colletotrichum: species, ecology, and interactions was held on 1 August 2010 at the 9th International Mycological Congress (IMC9) in Edinburgh, UK. The meeting, organized by Paul Cannon (UK) and Ulrike Damm (The Netherlands), brought together 23 scientists from 12 countries working in different fields of mycology, but with a common interest in the genus Colletotrichum. Seven presentations covered a wide range of topics, ranging from systematics and population genetics to host-pathogen interactions and genome projects. This contribution provides a synopsis of the presentations made at that meeting.
Systematics and Identification
The first four presentations dealt with the systematics and identification of major Colletotrichum species complexes containing various important anthracnose pathogens worldwide. While the identity of many important species still requires revision, molecular techniques improve the delimitation of species that are hard to distinguish based on morphology alone and reveal their phylogenetic relationships. This will inevitably result in name changes but has implications for everyone working with this genus, especially plant pathologists, and will improve our understanding of the role these species play in nature.
Ulrike Damm gave an overview of her ongoing collaboration with Paul Cannon about the phylogeny of three species complexes. The aim of this project is to delineate species within these complexes, characterize known and new species, and designate epitypes to provide the basis for accurate identifications of Colletotrichum species. This goal has so far been achieved for species with curved conidia from herbaceous hosts, which in the past were mostly identified as C. dematium. Multi-gene analyses and morphological characterization revealed several diverse and distantly related species, including four new species. Seven species were epitypified, including C. dematium and the type species of the genus, C. lineola. A second study confirmed most of the previously recognized groups within the C. acutatum species complex. Most of these could be defined on the basis of type strains or strains suitable for epitypification. Literature reports and preliminary studies using ITS sequence data indicated that C. boninense represents a species complex as well.
The presentations of the Special Interest Group meeting on Colletotrichum: species, ecology, and interactions, held on 1 August 2010 during IMC9 in Edinburgh, UK, are outlined. Seven research projects, ranging from systematics and population genetics to host-pathogen interactions and genome projects, were presented. The meeting revealed that currently major species complexes in the genus Colletotrichum are being revised, and the identities of many pathogens are being clarified based on molecular phylogenies. The genomes of four species have been sequenced and decoded, providing an enormous amount of data that enhance our understanding of the biology of Colletotrichum species.
Article info: Submitted: 27 October 2010; Accepted: 20 November 2010; Published: 23 November 2010.
Key words: genome sequencing, host-pathogen interaction, identification, pathogenicity, population genetics, systematics.
Analysis of strains previously identified as C. boninense resulted in clades that can be recognized as separate species, with differences in host range, distribution, and morphology, including C. boninense sensu stricto, Glomerella phyllanthi, C. hippeastri, and several presumably new species. Most of the species in the C. boninense complex and some in the C. acutatum species complex form teleomorph states in culture. Publications on the C. acutatum and C. boninense species complexes will appear in a 2011 issue of Studies in Mycology.
Colletotrichum gloeosporioides sensu lato is a species complex with broad genetic and biological diversity, grouped together by similar conidial morphology and ITS sequences. Bevan Weir and Peter Johnston (Landcare Research, Auckland, New Zealand) presented their research on this species complex and possible approaches to species delimitation through the Genealogical Concordance Phylogenetic Species Recognition (GCPSR). It was shown that the taxa C. musae, C. kahawae, C. xanthorrhoeae, C. nupharicola, C. fragariae, C. gloeosporioides sensu stricto, C. horii, C. theobromicola, C. ignotum, C. tropicale, C. asianum, C. siamense, C. fructicola, and C. hymenocallidis, as well as many putative undescribed species, are part of the C. gloeosporioides sensu lato complex. They recently characterized and neotypified one of these species, C. horii. The GCPSR concept was used to delimit taxa within C. gloeosporioides sensu lato. This concept considers that phylogenetic trees of different genes show discordance within a species due to gene flow between individuals. The common node where different gene trees show concordance is considered the speciation point. They applied the GC
The GCPSR concept worked well for species delimitation along currently recognized lines, except for C. kahawae, which was insufficiently distinct from several genetically similar non-Coffee Berry Disease-causing taxa. It was suggested that this may be due to the recent emergence (1920) of C. kahawae as a pathogen and that insufficient time had passed for ecological niche specialization to manifest as mutations in the genes used. They proposed that C. kahawae be recognized at the subspecific rank. A publication on their work on the C. gloeosporioides sensu lato species complex will appear in the 2011 issue of Studies in Mycology on Colletotrichum as well.
Colletotrichum acutatum causes economically significant losses in temperate, subtropical, and tropical crops. Globally, C. acutatum populations display considerable genotypic and phenotypic diversity. Riccardo Baroncelli (University of Warwick, Wellesbourne, UK) presented his research on evolutionary relationships in C. acutatum populations in collaboration with Charles Lane (FERA, Sand Hutton, York, UK) and Prasad Sreenivasaprasad (University of Warwick, Wellesbourne, UK). The overall objective is to understand the evolutionary relationships within the species, with particular reference to the pathogen populations associated with strawberry production systems in the UK. More than 150 C. acutatum isolates related to different hosts worldwide have been assembled. Phylogenetic analysis of sequence data from the rDNA block, Mat1-2, and β-tubulin-2 genes shows eight distinct genetic groups within C. acutatum. The subsets of isolates represented within these genetic groups correspond to the previously identified groups A1 to A8. Almost all of the homothallic isolates capable of sexual reproduction comprise a single genetic group, A7. Isolates representing populations capable of heterothallic sexual reproduction belong to two distinct genetic groups, A3 and A5. Molecular characterization of C. acutatum populations representing the introduction and spread of the pathogen in the strawberry production systems in the UK showed the presence of three genetic groups (A2, A3, and A4). Their results suggest the existence of C. acutatum populations potentially undergoing speciation processes related to their reproductive behavior and host association patterns. Further molecular and phenotypic characterization is in progress.
Lei Cai (Key Laboratory of Systematic Mycology & Lichenology, Institute of Microbiology, Beijing, China) and Kevin Hyde (School of Science, Mae Fah Luang University, Chiang Rai, Thailand) presented their research on Colletotrichum species from Asian fruits and leaves. Fruit rots (anthracnose) were previously often attributed to Colletotrichum species.
C. gloeosporioides and C. acutatum. Identifications were, however, based on morphological characters, or if gene sequence data were used, comparisons were often made with incorrectly applied names. Colletotrichum gloeosporioides was recently epitypified (Cannon et al. 2008), so that living cultures and sequence data are, for the first time, available for comparison with fresh collections. Analysis of sequence data from 25 isolates, selected from 140 obtained strains based on host diversity and morphology, compared these with the C. gloeosporioides epitype. Contrary to previous assumptions, none of these isolates from tropical fruits was C. gloeosporioides sensu stricto (Phoulivong et al. 2010). The five gene regions used in this study resolved C. asianum, C. fructicola, C. horii, C. kahawae, and C. gloeosporioides in the C. gloeosporioides species complex as distinct phylogenetic lineages with high statistical support. Many tested strains could not be assigned to any known taxa in this analysis. They also reported Colletotrichum species from Amaryllidaceae, Orchidaceae, Cordyline fruticosa, and Jasminum sambac, the latter including two new species (Wikee et al. 2010), and updated the typifications of C. coccodes, C. falcatum, and C. musae. Genomic studies of Colletotrichum species provide excellent models for studying fungal-plant interactions (Perfect et al. 1999). Several large-scale genome projects are in progress for Colletotrichum species, aiming to produce high-quality assemblies of genome sequences to provide resources for comparative genomics and the molecular analysis of fungal pathogenicity, which allows the identification of genes and proteins relevant to each stage of plant infection. Colletotrichum graminicola is a destructive pathogen of maize, causing stalk rot and leaf blight, while C. higginsianum attacks many cultivated forms of Brassica as well as Arabidopsis thaliana, providing a model pathosystem in which both partners can be genetically manipulated (O’Connell et al. 2004). Both pathogens employ a hemibiotrophic infection strategy, but while the biotrophic phase of C. graminicola extends into many host cells, that of C. higginsianum is confined to single epidermal cells. Richard O’Connell (Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research, Cologne, Germany) gave an overview of the C. higginsianum and C. graminicola genome research, which he is conducting in collaboration with Lisa Vaillancourt (University of Kentucky, USA), Li-Jun Ma (MIT-Broad Institute, USA), and Mike Thon (CIALE-University of Salamanca, Spain). Comparing the genomes of two species with contrasting pathogenic lifestyles and host specificities will allow them to study lineage-specific expansions and contractions of gene families and identify genes undergoing rapid evolution (diversifying selection), which may be involved in interactions with the host plant, such as those encoding secreted effector proteins. The 57.4 Mb genome of C. graminicola comprises 13 chromosomes and was sequenced at the Broad Institute (8X Sanger, 11X paired-end 454), resulting in an assembly of 1,151 contigs in 653 scaffolds. The 52.5 Mb genome of C. higginsianum comprises 11 chromosomes and was sequenced using a combination of 454 (24X), Illumina paired-end (60X), and Sanger fosmid sequencing (0.2X). These data assembled into 8,301 contigs in 367 scaffolds. For genome annotation, 890,000 ESTs were generated from C. higginsianum by 454-sequencing cDNA libraries representing appressoria formed in vitro, appressoria penetrating leaf epidermis, biotrophic hyphae, and necrotrophic mycelium.
In addition, approximately 22,000 Sanger ESTs were obtained from the in vitro mycelium of C. graminicola. Both genomes have now been annotated by the Broad Institute, with 12,006 protein-coding genes predicted for C. graminicola and around 15,900 for C. higginsianum. Colletotrichum orbiculare is an anthracnose fungus that infects Cucurbitaceae. Yasuyuki Kubo (Kyoto Prefectural University, Japan) provided an update on the C. orbiculare genome project, conducted in collaboration with Yoshitaka Takano (Kyoto University, Japan) and Ken Shirasu (RIKEN Plant Science Center, Yokohama, Japan). The pathogenicity, morphology, and hemibiotrophic infection strategy of strain 104-T (=MAFF 240422) are well-studied, making it a rational choice for the genome sequencing project. Furthermore, strain 104-T has demonstrated stability in both pathogenesis and morphogenesis for many years, and various insertional mutants are available. Gene manipulation techniques such as Agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated transformation and protoplast transformation are established, and for host-parasite interaction studies, the model plant Nicotiana benthamiana is used as a susceptible host. So far, several factors involved in infection-related morphogenesis have been identified in C. orbiculare 104-T. Signal transduction pathways, including the cAMP-dependent pathway and the MAP kinase pathway, are essential for germination, appressorium development, infection hyphae formation, and invasive growth, while the melanin biosynthesis pathway is crucial for appressorium function. Several structural and regulatory genes involved in these pathways have been identified. Peroxisome function is also essential for pathogenesis, and two peroxisome biogenesis genes, PEX6 and PEX13, were functionally analyzed. Recently, it was reported that the pexophagy factor ATG26 is critical for appressorium function. The genome analysis of C. orbiculare is nearing completion, allowing comparisons of genomic data among three Colletotrichum species—C. higginsianum, C. graminicola, and C. orbiculare—which belong to different phylogenetic clades within the genus. These data will provide a comprehensive basis for studying the biology of the different Colletotrichum species. A study on the host-pathogen interaction between C. orbiculare and N. benthamiana was presented by Kae Yoshino (Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan). This project is conducted in collaboration with Fumie Sugimoto, Hirofumi Yoshioka, Tetsuro Okuno, and Yoshitaka Takano (all from the Graduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan). By functionally screening C. orbiculare cDNAs using the N. benthamiana-A. tumefaciens in planta expression system, they identified a novel effector gene, NIS1, whose product induces cell death in N. benthamiana. Deletion of the signal peptide of NIS1 abolished its cell death activity, indicating that NIS1 is recognized in the apoplasts of N. benthamiana. The GFP-based localization study, combined with biochemical analysis, revealed that NIS1, with its inducing activity, is secreted from C. orbiculare cells during the fungal invasion phase inside plant tissue. NIS1-mediated cell death was inhibited by virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) of SGT1 or HSP90 in N. benthamiana, while VIGS of RAR1 had no effect. These results indicate that SGT1 and HSP90, components of R-gene mediated defenses, are involved in the NIS1-induced cell death. Surprisingly, the deletion of NIS1 did
Arabidopsis thaliana caused growth reduction, implying that the NIS1-encoded effector has an activity to interfere with plant development. These data indicate that C. orbiculare secretes the effector that can be recognized by N. benthamiana, but this potential effector-triggered immunity might be repressed in this susceptible interaction. Alan Buddie (CABI Europe-UK, Egham, UK) announced a further genome project for C. gloeosporioides. The project is a collaboration between CABI and The Genome Analysis Centre (TGAC), Norwich, UK, to carry out a whole genome sequence of the ex-epitype strain of C. gloeosporioides (IMI 356878). The DNA sequencing phase is nearing completion, and they are going to start soon with the assembly. The meeting provided good evidence of the rapidity with which our understanding of Colletotrichum genomics is improving and nicely complemented the outputs of another Colletotrichum workshop that was held earlier in 2010, in conjunction with the 10th European Conference on Fungal Genetics in Leeuwenhorst, the Netherlands. It was particularly exciting to witness the increasing power of genomic research tools and their potential impact on our understanding of fungal systematics and speciation. It provided good opportunities to coordinate research programs, exchange data, and share experiences.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS: Alan Buddie (CABI Europe-UK, Egham, UK) is thanked for sharing the news about the new Colletotrichum genome project.
REFERENCES: Ané C, Larget B, Baum DA, Smith SD, Rokas A (2007) Bayesian estimation of concordance among gene trees. Molecular Biology and Evolution 24: 412–426. Asakura M, Ninomiya S, Sugimoto M, Oku M, Yamashita S, Okuno T, Sakai Y, Takano Y (2009) Atg26-Mediated Pexophagy Is Required for Host Invasion by the Plant Pathogenic Fungus Colletotrichum orbiculare. Plant Cell 21: 1291–1304. Cai L, Hyde KD, Taylor PWJ, Weir BS, Waller J, Abang MM, Zhang JZ, Yang YL, Phoulivong S, Liu ZY, Prihastuti H, Shivas RG, McKenzie EHC, Johnston PR (2009) A polyphasic approach for studying Colletotrichum. Fungal Diversity 39: 183–204. Cannon PF, Buddie AG, Bridge PD (2008) The typification of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides. Mycotaxon 104: 189–204. Crouch JA, Clarke BB, White JW, Hillman BI (2009a) Systematic analysis of the falcate-spored graminicolous Colletotrichum and a description of six new species of the fungus from warm-season grasses. Mycologia 101: 717–732. Damm U, Woudenberg JHC, Cannon PF, Crous PW (2009) Colletotrichum species with curved conidia from herbaceous hosts. Fungal Diversity 39: 45–87. Fujihara N, Sakaguchi A, Tanaka S, Fujii S, Tsuji G, Shiraishi T, O’Connell R, Kubo Y (2010) Peroxisome biogenesis factor PEX13 is required for appressorium-mediated plant infection by the anthracnose fungus Colletotrichum orbiculare. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions 23: 436–445. Hyde KD, Cai L, Cannon PF, Crouch JA, Crous PW, Damm U, Goodwin PH, Chen H, Johnston PR, Jones EBG, Liu ZY, McKenzie EHC, Moriwaki J, Noireung P, Pennycook SR, Pfenning LH, Pri
Tugayé M-T, Dumas B (2004) A novel Arabidopsis-Colletotrichum pathosystem for the molecular dissection of plant-fungal interactions. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions 17: 272–282. Colletotrichum: species, ecology and interactions. Perfect SE, Hughes HB, O’Connell RJ, Green JR (1999) Colletotrichum: a model genus for studies on pathology and fungal–plant interactions. Fungal Genetics and Biology 27:186–198. Phoulivong S, Cai L, Chen H, McKenzie EHC, Abdelsalam K, Chukeatirote E, Hyde KD (2010) Colletotrichum gloeosporioides is not a common pathogen on tropical fruits. Fungal Diversity 44: 33–43. Sreenivasaprasad S, Talhinhas P (2005) Genotypic and phenotypic diversity in Colletotrichum acutatum, a cosmopolitan pathogen causing anthracnose on a wide range of hosts. Molecular Plant Pathology 6: 361–378. Takano Y, Kubo Y, Kuroda I, Furusawa I (1997) Temporal transcriptional pattern of three melanin biosynthesis genes, PKS1, SCD1, and THR1, in appressorium-differentiating and nondifferentiating conidia of Colletotrichum lagenarium. Applied and Environmental Microbiology 63: 351–354. Tanaka S, Ishihama N, Yoshioka H, Huser A, O’Connell R, Tsuji G, Tsuge S, Kubo Y (2009) Colletotrichum orbiculare ssd1 mutant enhances plant basal resistance through activation of a mitogen activated protein kinase pathway. Plant Cell 21: 2517–2526. Tsuji G, Fujii S, Fujihara N, Hirose C, Tsuge S, Shiraishi T, Kubo Y (2003) Agrobacterium tumefaciens-mediated transformation for random insertional mutagenesis in Colletotrichum lagenarium. Journal of General Plant Pathology 69: 230–239. Weir BS, Johnston PR (2010) Characterisation and neotypification of Gloeosporium kaki Hori as Colletotrichum horii nom. nov. Mycotaxon 111: 209–219. Wikee S, Cai L, Pairin N, McKenzie EHC, Su Y-Y, Chukeatirote E, Thi HN, Bahkali AH, Moslem MA, Abdelsalam K, Hyde KD (2010) Colletotrichum species from Jasmine (Jasminum sambac). Fungal Diversity.
