Effect of Rain Distribution Alteration on Splash Dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum
N. Ntahimpera, L. V. Madden, and L. L. Wilson
Department of Plant Pathology, The Ohio State University, Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center (OARDC), Wooster 44691. Accepted for publication 17 March 1997.
ABSTRACT
Ntahimpera, N., Madden, L. V., and Wilson, L. L. 1997. Effect of rain distribution alteration on splash dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum. Phytopathology 87:649-655. Splash dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum conidia from infected strawberry fruit was assessed using a rain simulator to determine the properties of rain (e.g., intensity [millimeters/hour] or drop size distribution) most related to dissemination. Dispersal with a simulated rain corresponding to a natural rain of about 11 mm/h was compared with dispersal of three other simulated rains that had larger and smaller drop sizes, on average, than idealized natural rains. Splash droplets were collected in sheltered petri plates with a selective medium for Colletotrichum, and colonies formed from conidia entrained in the droplets were counted and used as the measure of dispersal. Colonies were mostly confined to a 27 cm radius from the source, and the density of colonies decreased exponentially with the distance squared, as indicated by the fit of a diffusion-type model to the data. Splash dispersal was more affected by drop size distribution than rain intensity or other properties of the generated rains. There was a direct positive relationship between total colonies over 61 minutes of rain for a circular area with a 72-cm radius (Σ) and the mass (volume) median diameter of impacting drops (D0′) for four rain-simulation treatments. In a separate study, strawberry fruit were exposed to the same four simulated rains at two distances from a point source and for two rain durations. Although the proportion of infected fruit (y) increased with time and decreased with distance, rain treatment did not significantly affect y, as predicted based on past work with a wide range of intensities of simulated rains.
Additional keywords: anthracnose, disease spread, Fragaria × ananassa, models, quantitative epidemiology. The propagules of many fungal plant pathogens are dispersed from infected hosts by rain splash. Dispersal occurs by the impact of water drops onto an inoculum-bearing surface, the entrainment of spores in splash droplets, and the movement of droplets to new locations. Splash dispersal is positively affected by the size and velocity of individual incident raindrops. Rain is an environmental variable with many attributes. It has spatial and temporal characteristics (time of event, frequency, and rain duration) and intensity features. Rain intensity indicates not only the volume of water incident on a unit of area per unit of time but also the number and size distribution of drops, as well as the kinetic energy of the drop impacts. Intensity of rain can have a positive, negative, or no significant effect on new plant infections resulting from dispersal, even though increasing intensity simultaneously increases incident rain volume, number of drops, and drop sizes. Strawberry anthracnose is caused by several Colletotrichum species, with the dominant species in many parts of the world being Colletotrichum acutatum.
United States being C. acutatum J.H. Simmonds. Conidia of C. acutatum are produced in acervuli, a characteristic of rain-splashed fungi. Previous studies of C. acutatum have characterized the physical aspects of dispersal from single-drop impactions and from simulated rain over an experimental area, and quantified the effects of surface topography and plant density on dispersal and disease spread. Recently, Madden et al. characterized the relationship between rain intensity and splash dispersal of C. acutatum for a wide range of intensities. The number of dispersed spores increased with increasing intensity, as expected based on properties of rain and known effects of single-drop impacts on dispersal, but there was also a nonlinear relationship between rain intensity and the proportion of fruit exposed to the rain that became infected by C. acutatum. Maximum fruit infection occurred at an intermediate rain intensity corresponding to about 30 mm/h. Although more spores were removed from the source as intensity increased, the wash-off of spores from potential infection sites also increased, thus leading to the nonlinear response. In the study by Madden et al., increasing rain intensity was accomplished by increasing the number and size of simulated rain drops, incident volume of water per unit of area and time, and, presumably, kinetic energy. This was intended to duplicate intensity characteristics of natural rains of a single idealized type (e.g., shower, thunderstorm). Thus, it was not possible to determine which component of rain was the determinant for the measured dispersal effects. The objective of this study was to determine how splash dispersal of C. acutatum is affected by generated rains with drop distributions different from idealized natural rains. Specifically, rains were generated that had larger and smaller drop sizes, on average, than natural rains of a single type. It was hypothesized that splash dispersal for rains of similar incident water volume per unit of area and time (i.e., intensity) would be greatest for the rains with larger drop sizes. It was further hypothesized that fruit infection would not be related to the altered rain distribution, because of the complicated relationship previously found between rain intensity and fruit disease incidence. Preliminary results were previously reported.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Rain generation system. A rain simulator developed at The Ohio State University, Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center, was used to investigate the effect of altering rain intensity on the dispersal of conidia. The system consisted of an upward-pointing and rotating wide-angle spray nozzle that produced a conical pattern and ensured the generation of uniform rain at the ground surface over a 1.2 × 1.2-m experimental area. The height of drop fall was 4 m with water pressure levels of 69 or 138 kPa at the nozzle orifice, which were maintained constantly with a precision flow valve. Two spray nozzles were used individually in this study to generate simulated rains.
Effects of rain intensity alteration on splash dispersal of C. acutatum was studied using rain simulations produced by four nozzle/pressure combinations. The standard treatment, used as a basis for comparison, was the 20W nozzle with 69 kPa of water pressure. The cumulative volume distribution was similar to the long-term average for a natural rain of 11 mm/h. The second treatment involved the 20W nozzle with 138 kPa of water pressure, which produced a higher rain intensity (i.e., higher milliliters per square centimeter per minute or millimeters per hour) but with smaller drops, on average, than for the standard treatment. The third treatment used the same nozzle and pressure as the standard but had a horizontal screen (1 × 1 m) placed directly below the nozzle. This screen was made of woven synthetic fabrics, providing 30% actual shade. Water collected on the screen and dripped through in an attempt to produce a similar intensity to that without the screen but with larger drop sizes. The last treatment used a smaller nozzle (10W) with higher water pressure (138 kPa). This setup aimed to produce a similar volume as the standard treatment, but with more and smaller drops, on average. For both the 10W and 20W nozzles, idealized natural rains were only obtained using a pressure of 69 kPa. The intensity for each treatment was determined as described by Reynolds et al. Twelve 10-cm-diameter funnels were placed in cylinders, approximately evenly distributed over the experimental area. Rain was generated for 15 minutes, and the volume of collected water was determined and converted to milliliters per square centimeter per hour. Intensity was evaluated three times for each treatment. For the nozzle/pressure treatments of 10W/138 kPa, 20W/69 kPa, and 20W/138 kPa, cumulative volume distribution (the proportion of total water volume accounted for by drops less than or equal to a certain diameter) was determined from drop size data provided by the manufacturer. For the treatment consisting of 20W/69 kPa with the screen, drops were collected on water-sensitive paper, as previously done for single-drop studies. Thirty-seven 75 × 52-mm cards of water-sensitive paper were exposed immediately above the target area for about 1 second and then dried. The diameters of drop traces on the paper were determined with an image analyzing computer following the method described by Reynolds et al. The equivalent diameter of circles was calculated based on a spread factor of two. The mass (volume) median diameter (D0′) of impacting incident drops was determined from the cumulative volume distribution. Half of the volume or mass of incident rain is represented by drops less than (or greater than) this diameter. D0′ is directly related to, but slightly larger than, the mass median diameter of drops per cubic meter of air above a surface (D0). For natural rains of a single type, D0 (and, hence, D0′) increases with intensity.
Inoculum. The isolate of C. acutatum used in this experiment (ATCC 90170) was the same as in previous studies. To maintain pathogenicity, strawberry fruit were regularly inoculated with the fungus, which was then reisolated from infected fruit by scraping conidia from the fruit and streaking on potato dextrose agar. Cultures were incubated in the dark at 25°C for up to 7 days. Spore suspensions were prepared by scraping conidia from cultures and suspending them in deionized water, adjusting the density to 10^5 conidia per milliliter with the ai
To prepare inoculum-source fruit for dispersal tests, detached, immature (green-to-white stage) strawberry fruit from greenhouse-grown plants were washed with deionized water, surface sterilized in 70% ethanol for 60 seconds, rinsed with deionized water, dried, and placed on elevated screens (6-mm mesh) contained in 5-liter plastic containers. The containers were filled with approximately 700 ml of deionized water. The pedicel of each fruit was inserted through the mesh of the metal screen and immersed in water to minimize fruit desiccation. The fruit were then sprayed to runoff with the conidial suspension. The containers were closed and incubated at 25°C for 24 hours to ensure infection, after which the lids were removed, and the fruit were kept at 25°C for 7 days to ensure lesion development and sporulation.
For the gravity samplers and spore deposition, gravity samplers, consisting of Petri plates with selective media shielded from rain, were used to sample conidia of Colletotrichum acutatum dispersed in rain splash droplets. A wood frame measuring 1.5 × 1.5 m was placed immediately below the rain generator. The frame was covered with a steam-sterilized soil mix to a depth of about 3 cm.
The table presents characteristics of the rain-simulator spray nozzles, rain intensity, splashed intensity, and colonies of Colletotrichum acutatum in Petri plates across four treatments. It includes details such as the generated and transformed rain intensities, median drop sizes, and the number of colonies observed after two time intervals of rain simulation. The results indicate significant differences in spore deposition and colony counts among treatments, as denoted by varying letters assigned to means within the same column, indicating statistical significance based on Fisher's protected least significant difference method. Each treatment also has accompanying standard errors and notes on replication numbers.
The mix was made of soil and peat moss (5:1, by volume), supplemented with 150 g of 9-45-15 N-P-K fertilizer and lime. This soil was discarded after each test run. To determine the volume of splashed water, five sheltered gravity samplers were placed approximately randomly over the experimental area, ensuring that there was at least 40 cm between samplers. Petri plates (9-cm diameter) with selective medium for Colletotrichum were labeled and weighed immediately before use. At 12 and 27 minutes into a simulated rain, plates were placed under the rain shields for 2 to 3 minutes of exposure. The shields prevented the collection of directly impacting raindrops. Plates were collected and immediately weighed again to determine the weight gain due to water splashed onto each plate. Controls consisted of three plates with media that were weighed at the same time but not exposed to rain. The average weight loss in the control plates, due to evaporation of water in the media, was used to correct the weight changes in the rain-exposed plates. Means of splashed water intensity were determined for each test run of the rain simulation after converting to volumetric units of milliliters per square centimeter per hour, based on the unit density of water. Splash for each rain intensity was tested three times. For splash-dispersal determination, the frame was covered evenly with sterilized soil mix, and five inoculated fruits with sporulating lesions were clustered on the ground 30 to 40 cm from one corner of the frame. Petri plates (6-cm diameter) containing the selective medium for Colletotrichum were positioned, with the lids removed, under metal rain shields at 12, 27, 42, 57, and 72 cm (one plate for each distance) from the inoculum source, as described by Madden and Yang et al. To test for contamination of the soil cover, one plate was placed under rain shelters and exposed to 1 minute of rain before introducing the source fruit. Starting at 0 minutes into a simulated rain, plates were exposed to splashing water every 5 minutes for 1-minute periods, for a total duration of 61 minutes. New plates were used for each time period and distance. Exposed plates were covered with lids and incubated at 25°C for 2 days. The plates were then transferred to a refrigerator at 6°C for 2 to 3 days. For each plate, Colletotrichum colonies corresponding to each time (rain duration) and distance from the source were counted with the aid of a magnifying plate counter. Simulation runs were conducted at least three times for each treatment. Periodically, representative colonies were transferred to PDA medium to obtain greater sporulation for examination of morphological characteristics and positive fungal identification.
In the fruit disease incidence study, strawberry plants (cv. Midway) were raised from transplants in 15-cm-diameter pots containing sterilized soil mix (soil/peat/sand, 2:2:1, by volume) in a greenhouse. Twenty plants were used for each rain simulation. Methods were consistent with those used previously by Madden et al. Potted plants were supported by a wood frame (1.5 × 1.5 m) in two concentric circles (30- and 60-cm radii) placed directly below the rain generator. The frame was covered by sterilized soil mix so that the soil level was even with the base of the plants. Five infected source fruits (prepared as for the gravity sampler study) were placed in a tight cluster on the soil in the center of the circles. To maintain consistency in the numbe
The entire area was rained on for 16 minutes. At 4 and 16 minutes into the rain episode, 20 exposed fruits from each circle were collected and placed on elevated wire-mesh screens in 5-liter containers, covered, and incubated at 25°C. After 24 hours, the lids were removed to allow for natural drying. The pedicel ends were cut afterward, and the fruits were placed back into the containers with their pedicels inserted through the wire-mesh screens into deionized water. The containers were returned to the incubator at 25°C, and the assessment of fruit infection was made by visually examining each fruit 7 days after each rain simulation. The proportion of infected fruit (disease incidence) was used as the measure of conidia dispersal.
Data analysis included determining the number of colonies in a petri plate, converted to a unit of area and time (Y, number per square centimeter per minute) for each distance, time (rain duration), treatment, and repetition. Y is proportional to the deposition flux density of conidia. Assuming equal dispersal in all directions due to the lack of airflow, the interpolated total number of colonies (Σ) during each 61-minute period over a circular area with a radius of 72 cm (the maximum distance measured) was estimated by numerical integration over both the distance and time domains. The integration was performed using Simpson’s 3/8 rule with the aid of SURFER software. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted on incident rain, volume of water splashed, total number of colonies (Σ), and fruit disease incidence. For each treatment, means and their standard errors were calculated prior to transformation. To stabilize the variances, Σ was transformed to Σ1/5 before statistical analysis. Square-root transformation was applied to splashed rain intensity. Similarly, the proportion of infected fruit (y) was transformed using the complementary log-log transformation, y* = ln[–ln(1 – y)]. For fruit disease incidence, ANOVA was performed on y* as a repeated measures experiment, in which treatments and blocks (experiment repetitions) were the randomized factors; distance from the source and rain duration were, respectively, spatially and temporally repeated measures. A diffusion-type model was fitted to the colony data to describe mean Y as a function of rain duration (t; minutes) and distance from the source (s; centimeters). Model parameters included Q′ (per minute), representing the initial release of spores from the inoculum source, related to inoculum density on the fruit and properties of the simulated rain; α (square centimeters per minute), inversely related to the steepness of the spore deposition gradient and a measure of the average flight distance of splash droplets; and γ (per minute), representing the rate of spore loss from the system (e.g., infiltration of spores through the soil). Parameters were estimated using nonlinear least squares with the NLIN procedure of SAS.
Characteristics of generated rains indicated that incident rain volumes (per unit of area and time) from the different treatments were significantly different from each other, based on ANOVA. Variability was very low. The standard treatment (20W/69 kPa) produced the lowest volume of water. Placing a horizontal screen below the nozzle orifice resulted in a slightly higher incident rain volume than the standard treatment, presumably because the water first accumulated before dripping onto the ex
The cumulative volume distributions of simulated rains are represented in the accompanying figure. The curves for the small nozzle at higher pressure (10W/138 kPa) and for 20W/138 kPa were positioned to the left of the cumulative distribution of the standard treatment, indicating smaller drop sizes overall. The cumulative volume distribution for the screen treatment was located to the right of the standard treatment for drop diameters less than 2.7 mm. For larger drop sizes, the distribution for the screen treatment abruptly reached its maximum (100%). The mass median drop diameter (D0′), indicated by the horizontal line in the figure, decreased with increasing water pressure at the 20W nozzle orifice. For the 10W nozzle at 138 kPa, D0′ was also lower than that of the standard treatment. The 20W/69 kPa with the screen resulted in a D0′ of 2.3 mm, which was 28% higher than for the standard treatment. The standard treatment (20W/69 kPa) produced rain with a cumulative volume distribution comparable to that of an idealized natural rain of approximately 11 mm/h. Other treatments were designed so that the rains did not correspond to idealized rains of a single type, such as thunderstorms, according to the Marshall-Palmer theory. However, natural rains with the same D0′ as the generated rains were identified using Ulbrich's methods and the equations in the appendix of Madden et al. Specifically, because D0 = 3.67/(41I–0.21), where I is rain intensity in millimeters per hour, it follows that D0′ = 4.34/(41I–0.21). Natural rains matching the D0′ for 10W/138 kPa and 20W/138 kPa had intensities of 3 and 5 mm/h, respectively, even though the generated volume of water for these treatments exceeded that of the standard treatment (11 mm/h). A natural rain with a D0′ of 2.3 mm, as found for the screen treatment, would have an intensity exceeding 40 mm/h. For all treatments, the volume of water splashed was lower after 12 minutes compared to 27 minutes of rain application, with treatment significantly affecting the volume splashed (P = 0.002). After 12 minutes, splashed water from the standard treatment (20W/69 kPa) was slightly, but significantly (P = 0.05), lower than splashed water from the other treatments. The treatments 10W/138 kPa and 20W/138 kPa exhibited similar splash water intensities; however, the screen treatment showed a considerably higher splash intensity than the others. The percentage of water splashed relative to incident rain ranged from 2 to 7%, with the highest percentage for the screen treatment. Similar results were observed after 27 minutes of rain application, although overall amounts and percentages were higher as the soil approached saturation. The mean number of Colletotrichum acutatum colonies (Y; cm–2 min–1) on a selective medium (under a rain shield) in relation to rain duration (t; min) and distance (s; cm) from the inoculum source for the four rain simulation treatments was illustrated. Numbers above the figures referred to the nozzle (10W or 20W) and pressure (69 or 138 kPa). The square root of Y (SQRT[Y]) was utilized to better represent the data at 42 cm and beyond, where colony density was low. The cumulative drop volume distributions of rain generated by four treatments using a rain simulator were depicted, with line labels indicating the
Gravity sampler study. The pattern of mean colony density (Y) for each treatment with respect to rain duration and distance from the inoculum source is illustrated. As with previous studies, Y generally declined with distance at any time and increased over time to a maximum before declining. Y in the 20W/69 kPa screen treatment was clearly higher than in the other treatments, while Y was lower in the treatments with 138 kPa of water pressure compared to those with 69 kPa. Based on ANOVA of the fifth root transformation of Σ, total colonies were significantly (P < 0.001) affected by the treatments. Block (repetition) did not significantly affect the results (P > 0.20). The treatment with the screen had the highest total number of colonies, while the treatment with the small nozzle and high pressure (10W/138 kPa) had the fewest total colonies. There were about eight times more colonies with the screen compared to the standard treatment, and the standard treatment had nine times as many colonies as 10W/138 kPa. Total colonies were strongly correlated with D0′. A linear relationship between Σ1/5 and D0′ was determined by least-squares regression as: Σ1/5 = –6.05 (1.64) + 11.55 (0.92) D0′, where the numbers in parentheses are the standard errors of the estimated intercept and slope. The equation had a coefficient of determination (r²) of 0.94 (P < 0.001). The diffusion-type model gave an acceptable fit of Y in relation to rain duration and distance, except for one treatment. This indicates that ln(Y) was linearly related to distance squared. Values of r² were above 0.80 for all treatments except 20W/69 kPa with the screen. The estimated parameter for the initial release of spores from the inoculum source (Q′) was highest for the screen treatment (74,918 min–1), more than double the Q′ value of the standard treatment. The 10W/138 kPa treatment had the lowest Q′ estimate (3,391 min–1), less than a tenth of the standard treatment. There was a strong positive relationship between Q′ and Σ. The rate of spore loss (γ) was not clearly related to treatment, although there was an approximately inverse relationship between Q′ and γ. Additionally, the standard error of the estimated γ was large for the screen treatment, indicating that the estimate was not precise for this treatment. The parameter for trajectory length (α) was estimated imprecisely, as indicated by large standard errors relative to α.
Fruit infection study. The main effects of rain duration (time) and distance from the inoculum source significantly (P = 0.004) affected the transformed proportion of infected fruit (y*). There was no significant interaction of time and distance (P > 0.05), and block (repetition) did not significantly affect the results (P > 0.05). The mean y (across all treatments and distances) increased from 0.13 (standard error = 0.022) at 4 minutes to 0.30 (standard error = 0.055) at 16 minutes. Mean incidence (across all treatments and times) decreased from 0.33 (standard error = 0.051) at 30 cm to 0.10 (standard error = 0.017) at 60 cm. Inspection of individual means showed the general trend of increasing y with time and decreasing y with distance for all treatments. The main effect of treatment was not significant (P > 0.06), even though the mean y for the small n
Drop size distribution of rain was found to be an important determinant of splash dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum spores. Even though experimental treatments with high water pressure at the nozzle orifice (10W/138 kPa and 20W/138 kPa) had somewhat higher incident rain (R) and splashed rain (Rs) intensity (milliliters per square centimeter per hour) than the standard, idealized, natural rain treatment (20W/69 kPa), the standard treatment had significantly greater spore dispersal, as measured by colonies in gravity samplers. The higher rain intensity for nozzles with high pressure was achieved by producing more but, on average, smaller drops than for the treatment with natural rain. That is, the drop volume distribution was shifted to the left, resulting in smaller D0′ values. Moreover, the treatment with the screen had the largest D0′, splashed the highest volume of water and percentage of the incident rain, and resulted in considerably more dispersed spores than the other treatments. Overall, dispersal was highly and positively correlated with estimated D0′ of the rains and not related to R of these deliberately altered generated rains. In natural rains of a single type, increasing rain intensity is linked with an increasing number of raindrops per unit area and time and also a shift of the drop size distribution to larger diameters. D0′ increases from about 1.2 mm with a 2 mm/h of idealized natural rain to about 2.5 mm with a 60 mm/h of rain, with a corresponding increase in frequency of drops of any given diameter with increasing rain intensity. Drop size distribution is affected somewhat by the type of rain episode, in addition to rain intensity. For instance, thunderstorms generally have larger D0′ (or D0) than do showers or oceanographic rains. Thus, two rains of different types, but similar intensities, may vary considerably in kinetic energy, and more than simple intensity may be needed to assess the risk of dispersal events. Splashed rain intensity (Rs) can be considered an indication of the assumed total kinetic energy of impacting water drops because results from controlled studies with single-drop impactions show that the volume of splashed water from a strawberry fruit is a positive function of the incident water-drop kinetic energy.
The estimated parameters and standard errors of the diffusion-type model fitted to the mean number of colonies of Colletotrichum acutatum (Y; cm–2 min–1) in relation to rain duration (t; min) and distance from the inoculum source (s; cm) for four treatments include the following: for treatment 20W/69, Q′ is 3.6 × 10^4 with a standard error of 1.0 × 10^4, α is 0.68 with a standard error of 1.05, γ is 0.049 with a standard error of 0.016, and r² is 0.84; for treatment 20W/138, Q′ is 1.0 × 10^4 with a standard error of 3.2 × 10^3, α is 2.42 with a standard error of 2.59, γ is 0.040 with a standard error of 0.003, and r² is 0.86; for treatment 20W/69Sc, Q′ is 7.5 × 10^4 with a standard error of 1.1 × 10^5, α is 0.59 with a standard error of 2.42, γ is 0.027 wi
In our study, Rs increased with increasing D0′, except for the 20W/69 kPa treatment. Since D0′ is a single measure of the cumulative volume distribution of rain, it may not fully reflect the kinetic energy of the generated rains. For a single drop, kinetic energy at impact is proportional to the cube of drop diameter times the velocity squared, and terminal velocity is proportional to the two-thirds power of drop diameter. Thus, kinetic energy for a drop at terminal velocity is directly related to drop diameter raised to the 4.3 power, and the largest drops contribute most of the total kinetic energy in a rain episode. Therefore, slight changes in frequencies of large drops can have a major effect on total kinetic energy per unit of area and time. However, kinetic energy may not be the best indicator of dispersal, because Σ was more related to D0′ than to Rs. This is consistent with single-drop studies. As expected, infection of rain-exposed healthy fruit located near the inoculum source (30 cm) was higher than for those located at 60 cm. Also, infection was higher for fruit exposed to 16 minutes of rain than for those exposed to only 4 minutes. However, rain distribution alteration did not significantly affect fruit disease incidence. This was hypothesized because of the previously found nonlinear relationship between R and y, in which y increased with R to a maximum and then declined, primarily due to wash-off of spores from the fruit. Although dispersed spores increased with D0′, it is likely that wash-off also increased. Thus, expanding on Madden et al., increasing rain intensity or shifting drop distribution to larger sizes at a single intensity may not lead to greater disease incidence, even though more spores may be dispersed.
Deposition of C. acutatum spores into gravity samplers declined sharply with distance from the source, as expected. Although most colonies of C. acutatum were located within 30 cm of the source, there were sufficient spores at 60 cm to result in infected fruit for all treatments. The diffusion-type model of Yang et al. adequately described the colony data for three of the four treatments, and the estimated initial spore release parameter (Q′) increased with D0′ and was strongly related to Σ. Madden et al. previously found that Q′ increased with R for idealized rains of a single type. The estimated parameter of gradient length (α) was erratic, as found by Madden et al. and Yang et al. Moreover, the spore loss parameter (γ) was not related to treatments, although the less satisfactory fit of the model to the data for the screen treatment may have precluded comparisons of γ. The γ values for three treatments were similar, possibly reflecting the narrow range in R tested here, compared with that used in Madden et al. Dispersal of inoculum by rain splash has been shown to be an important mechanism for disease spread over short distances in crops. Wind, ground cover (surface topography), and plant density all alter splash dispersal. Still unresolved are the interactions, if any, of rain properties (e.g., intensity) and the surface and plant canopy characteristics.
Research support and salaries were provided by state and federal funds, particularly a USDA-NRI competitive grant appropriated to the Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center (OA
Boudreau, M. A., and Madden, L. V. 1995. Effect of strawberry density on dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum by simulated rain. Phytopathology 85:934-941.
Brennan, R. M., Fitt, B. D. L., Taylor, G. C., and Colhoun, J. 1985. Dispersal of Septoria nodorum pycnidiospores by simulated raindrops in still air. Phytopathol. Z. 112:281-290.
Brennan, R. M., Fitt, B. D. L., Taylor, G. C., and Colhoun, J. 1985. Dispersal of Septoria nodorum pycnidiospores by simulated rain and wind. Phytopathol. Z. 112:291-297.
Eastburn, D. M., and Gubler, W. D. 1990. Strawberry anthracnose: Detection and survival of Colletotrichum acutatum in soil. Plant Dis. 74:161-163.
Fatemi, F., and Fitt, B. D. L. 1983. Dispersal of Pseudocercosporella herpotrichoides and Pyrenopeziza brassicae spores in splash droplets. Plant Pathol. 32:401-404.
Fitt, B. D. L., Creighton, N. F., Lacey, M. E., and McCartney, H. A. 1986. Effects of rainfall intensity and duration on dispersal of Rhynchosporium secalis conidia from infected barley leaves. Trans. Br. Mycol. Soc. 86:611-618.
Fitt, B. D. L., and McCartney, H. A. 1986. Spore dispersal in splash droplets. Pages 87-104 in: Water, Fungi and Plants. P. G. Ayres and L. Boddy, eds. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Fitt, B. D. L., McCartney, H. A., Creighton, N. F., Lacey, M. E., and Walklate, P. J. 1988. Dispersal of Rhynchosporium secalis conidia from infected barley leaves or straw by simulated rain. Ann. Appl. Biol. 112:49-59.
Fitt, B. D. L., McCartney, H. A., and Walklate, P. J. 1989. The role of rain in dispersal of pathogen inoculum. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 27:241-270.
Grove, G. G., Madden, L. V., and Ellis, M. A. 1985. Splash dispersal of Phytophthora cactorum from infected strawberry fruit. Phytopathology 75:611-615.
Huber, L., Fitt, B. D. L., and McCartney, H. A. 1996. The incorporation of pathogen spores into rain-splash droplets: A modelling approach. Plant Pathol. 45:506-517.
Kinnell, P. I. A. 1981. Rainfall intensity–kinetic energy relationships for soil loss prediction. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 45:153-155.
Madden, L. V. 1992. Rainfall and the dispersal of fungal spores. Adv. Plant Pathol. 8:39-79.
Madden, L. V. 1993. Aggregation of Colletotrichum acutatum in response to simulated rain episodes. J. Phytopathol. 138:145-156.
Madden, L. V., and Ellis, M
