Effect of Strawberry Density on the Spread of Anthracnose Caused by Colletotrichum acutatum
L. V. Madden and M. A. Boudreau
First author: Department of Plant Pathology, The Ohio State University, Wooster 44691-4096; second author: Department of Biology, Warren Wilson College, Asheville, NC 28815-9000. Accepted for publication 2 May 1997.
ABSTRACT
Madden, L. V., and Boudreau, M. A. 1997. Effect of strawberry density on the spread of anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum acutatum. Phytopathology 87:828-838. The spread of strawberry anthracnose, resulting from the rain splash dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum conidia, was determined in field plots by assessing fruit disease incidence at various distances from an introduced point source of infected fruit with sporulating lesions. Four within-row plant densities were established in replicated plots over two years. A generalized linear model with a logit link function and binomial distribution for incidence was used to quantify the effects of distance, side of the row relative to the inoculum source, plant density treatment, and their interactions on disease incidence. At all assessment times, there was a significant (P ≤ 0.05) decline in incidence with increasing distance from the spore source. Moreover, row side had a significant effect, with the near side having higher incidence than the far side. Plant density treatment had a significant, but nonlinear, effect on incidence, generally declining with increasing density. The side of the row relative to the inoculum source and density treatment could affect the steepness of the disease gradient as well as the overall level of disease incidence, depending on the assessment time and year. The combined effects of plant density and row side on the height and steepness of the disease gradients could be measured using the predicted distance at which incidence equals 10% (d10). Estimated d10 generally increased in a nonlinear manner with decreasing plant density. Additionally, plant density had a significant negative effect on the proportion of incident rain that penetrated the canopy. In a separate study, plant density did not consistently affect the infection of fruit that had been placed within the canopy immediately after being inoculated in the laboratory with a controlled inoculum density, indicating that conditions favoring infection were similar across the four densities. Thus, differences in mean disease incidence and disease gradients among the treatments were primarily due to differences in dispersal, not other components of the disease cycle. As previously reported in controlled studies using a rain simulator, however, the effects of plant density on dispersal were complex, and increasing density did not universally lead to decreasing disease incidence.
Additional keywords: Fragaria × ananassa, quantitative epidemiology.
The role of host density in disease dynamics is poorly understood but may be important in regulating spatial and temporal aspects of epidemics in both natural and agricultural ecosystems. In unmanaged or minimally managed communities, density-dependent plant mortality mediated by pathogen activity has been suggested in some studies. However, confounding variables in these systems have prevented clear demonstration of a causal relationship between density and disease. The situation is more straightforward in agricultural settings, where growers exercise control over density directly through planting, replanting, and thinning, and indirectly through pest control and fertility management. This control has allowed empirical evaluations of density-disease relations and may present opportunities for new disease management strategies through density regulation for certain crops.
Burdon and Chilvers reviewed studies that included over 40 host-pathogen combinations, the majority of which (62%) indicated positive correlations between plant density and disease intensity. However, in several pathosystems, negative correlations, inconsistent results, or a lack of relationship between plant density and disease intensity have recently been found. Differences in disease cycles, assessment techniques, and the occurrence of complicating variables (e.g., changes in host patterns as density changes) make comparison among and generalization from these studies difficult. The epidemiological models of Anderson and May, which emphasize animal systems, suggest that increasing host density will increase the probability of contact between an infectious unit (e.g., spore in transport or spore on a lesion) and a healthy unit (e.g., leaf or fruit), and therefore increase rates of development of diseased units. This is, in part, the intuitive basis for speculation that disease will increase with density, thus giving pathogen dispersal a primary role in the system. With a few exceptions, there is little empirical evaluation of density effects on pathogen dispersal. A detailed study of the splash-dispersed fungal pathogen Colletotrichum acutatum J.H. Simmonds, the cause of strawberry anthracnose, using simulated rain revealed significant reductions in spore deposition (per unit of area and time) within and between strawberry rows with increasing plant density. Interestingly, spore deposition did not decrease in a direct linear fashion with increasing plant density, and density still had an effect on deposition between rows when the inoculum source was not within the canopy, but between rows. The authors proposed three mechanisms by which density may influence dispersal: reduction in spore removal from the inoculum source (by sheltering of inoculum), reduction in resplash of spore-carrying droplets, and direct interception of spores in splash droplets by the plant canopy. The results indicated that all three mechanisms were operating and interacting, demonstrating the complicated nature of density influences on dispersal in this system. The complexity of the splash-dispersal system mandates not only a detailed study of individual mechanisms in controlled experiments, such as with a rain simulator, but also a phenomenological approach in which the overall impact of density on disease spread in space and time is evaluated for particular crops and pathogens. In this study, we assessed anthracnose fruit rot development from an inoculum point source in strawberry plots planted at a range of densities over each of two seasons. A generalized linear statistical model, which incorporates the spatial and plant density treatment aspects of the epidemic, was utilized for quantifying disease incidence.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Plot establishment: Sixteen 2 × 2 m plots were planted with strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa Duchesne ‘Midway’; Brittinghams Nursery, Salisbury, MD) in spring 1991 (for the 1992 experiment) and spring 1992 (for the 1993 experiment) on the experimental farm of the Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center, Wooster, OH. The sites for 1992 and 1993 were separated by 50 m. Plots were 2 m apart within each site. In both years, three rows, 1 m apart, were planted in each plot in an east-west orientation
Four plant densities were created, each replicated four times, which inevitably altered leaf distribution (i.e., patchiness) as well. Plots established in 1991 (for use in 1992) were all planted with a spacing of 30 cm between plants (seven plants per row); therefore, the density levels required for the 1992 experiments were achieved by a combination of thinning and supplementation with new transplants. The lowest density involved removing every other plant (i.e., the second, fourth, and sixth plants) from each row on 12 May 1992 and removing runners as they rooted throughout the season, maintaining a 60-cm intrarow spacing. The second density maintained the original 30-cm spacing, with runners not allowed to establish new crowns. The third density was created by planting a new crown between each existing plant on 8 May and allowing runners to root during the season. The highest density involved adding two new crowns between existing plants on 8 May and a transplanted runner from thinnings in low-density plots on 21 May, taking care not to damage the earlier transplants. Runners were also allowed to establish new crowns in this treatment. The four density treatments resulted in approximately 1.7, 3.3, 6.7, and 14.3 plants per meter of row at the beginning of the experiment. Plots established for the 1993 experiments were initially planted in 1992 at intrarow spacings of 7 cm (four plots), 15 cm (four plots), and 30 cm (eight plots). Four of the low-density plots were thinned to 60-cm spacing in May 1993 to achieve the fourth density. Again, runners were only allowed to root in the two high-density plots. Plants per meter of row were the same as in 1992.
Inoculation and assessment: Plots were infested by placing five infected fruit with abundant conidia midway between the south and middle rows at the east end of each plot. This was similar to the method used by Madden et al., except that they placed their inoculum 30 cm from the end of the rows. Inoculum placement occurred when susceptible (white-colored) fruit were abundant, immediately prior to a rain event. This took place on 14 June 1992 and 7 June 1993. Ripe fruit were removed by hand from all plants prior to infestation. The inoculum source fruit were removed after 24 hours. Plots were assessed approximately twice weekly by removing ripe fruit from the plots and recording disease status (diseased/healthy [symptomless]) and position (distance from the east end of the row, row number, and side of the row). Fruit on the easternmost plant of the south and middle rows were not removed from the plots to provide a continuing inoculum source throughout the experiment. Removing fruit throughout the rest of the plots mimicked standard commercial harvesting techniques and also reduced secondary disease spread, as inoculum was removed with the diseased fruit. Assessments for the 1992 experiments occurred on 23, 26, and 29 June, and 2 July. In 1993, assessments took place on 17, 21, 24, and 29 June. All assessed fruit were assigned to distance categories based on calculated straight-line distances from the original inoculum source, as done previously. Fruit disease incidence was determined as the proportion of fruit with anthracnose symptoms for each row side (near or far side, relative to the inoculum) in several distance categories. The catego
Rain collection. Rain near ground level within a row (through fall plus leaf drip) was measured to assess the influence of plant density treatment on rain penetration of the canopy. The method collected rain that was not directly intercepted by the canopy and also intercepted rain that subsequently dripped or splashed to the ground. It did not collect rain that was intercepted and then evaporated, absorbed, or splashed away from the row. Polypropylene disposable cups (89 ml volume, opening diameter of 5.3 cm; Solo Cup Co., Urbana, IL) were used to collect rain approximately 1 to 2 cm above the soil surface. To allow easy removal of the cups and prevent soil and surface water from entering them, a rubber stopper was taped to the bottom of the cup, and the assembly was placed in a second cup permanently buried in the ground, with holes punched in the bottom for drainage.
In 1992, rain was collected at two locations in one row of each replicate plot, using the central 1 m of the row most interior to the area containing all plots. One sample cup was placed midway between nonrunner crowns, and a second near a nonrunner crown. Four additional cups were located in open areas of the research site with no canopy. Fourteen rain episodes were sampled, which included times before inoculum was introduced and after the disease assessments were finished. In 1993, two samples were again taken in each plot and four in open areas, but positioning was slightly different to accommodate testing of raindrop sampling units, described elsewhere. A sampling cup was placed approximately 50 cm from either end of the middle row of each plot, with each cup positioned one-quarter of the distance between adjacent nonrunner crowns. That is, each cup was located halfway between one nonrunner crown and the point midway between this crown and an adjacent nonrunner crown. Ten rain episodes were sampled.
In both years, water volume in each cup was recorded as soon as possible after a rain event, usually within 1 to 2 hours. Total rainfall (cubic centimeters per square centimeter, converted to a depth measurement of millimeters) within and outside the canopy for each rain event was calculated from the water volume collected in each rain sample cup, the area of the cup, and the duration of the event determined from a tipping-bucket rain gauge (model TE525; Campbell Scientific Inc., Logan, UT) located adjacent to the plots. Data from the two cup locations in a plot were averaged for a whole-plot estimate, except for the lowest density plots. In this case, sample cups midway between plants always occurred in open gaps in the canopy. It was estimated that such gaps covered one-third of the row area sampled, whereas two-thirds of the row was under canopy and sampled by the second cup nearer the crown. Data from the two cups were weighted accordingly to reflect the areas sampled to obtain a whole-plot rainfall estimate. Data for each plot were divided by the mean value from the sample cups outside the plots to determine rainfall amount relative to ambient amount. In addition to the rain measurements, a sheltered thermistor and a leaf wetness grid (models 107 and 237, respectively; Campbell Scientific Inc.) were also utilized.
Scientific Inc. were used to electronically measure temperature and leaf wetness at mid-canopy level in one row of one plot representing each treatment. Similar probes and a resistance-based relative humidity sensor were positioned at the site away from the strawberry canopy. Data were recorded at 10-minute intervals throughout the season on a 21X datalogger. An 'index of predicted infection' associated with each rain event was calculated based on the wetness duration (rain duration plus wetness period after the rain stopped) and average temperature during the wet period. The index was calculated using an equation from Wilson et al., as done previously, and was based on the predicted proportion of inoculated fruit that became infected by C. acutatum in controlled studies with the specified wetness duration and temperature.
A study was conducted to determine if the microenvironment within the canopies varied in terms of favorability for fruit infection. The effect of plant density treatment on fruit infection post-deposition was assessed by determining disease incidence of inoculated, detached fruit placed within each treatment row canopy and in unsheltered areas adjacent to the plot site. Greenhouse-grown fruit ('Midway') at the white stage were collected with pedicels and inoculated in the laboratory as previously described, but with a concentration of 1 × 10³ conidia/ml. This inoculum density produces a fruit disease incidence of approximately 0.5 with 12 hours of wetness and 25°C in controlled-environment chambers. The inoculated fruit were brought immediately to the field, and the pedicels were placed in small holders made of 200-µl polystyrene pipette tips, the ends of which had been sealed by melting. The holders were inserted into the ground and filled with distilled water, so that the fruit pedicel could be submerged to prevent drying, while the fruit itself rested above the holder lip and was exposed to the environment. All holders were cleaned with 95% ethanol 1 to 2 days earlier and rinsed three times before being filled with water.
Six holders were placed randomly within each row of the two highest densities. For the lowest two densities, three holders were randomly placed in the part of the rows farthest from the crowns ("gaps"), and three holders were placed in the part of the rows located near the crowns ("patches"). To observe infection where no canopy was present, four replicate plots with three rows each were identified in the rototilled area around the strawberry plots, and the holders were placed here as well. Inoculated fruit were placed in holders in the early evening before dew formed and were later removed to labeled jars for assessment in the laboratory. The experiment was conducted three times: from July 21 to 27, August 6 to 13, and August 17 to 26, 1992. All 18 fruit holders were used in each plot of each treatment in the first repetition of the experiment; however, due to low fruit production in the greenhouse, only nine holders were used in each plot in the last two repetitions.
Data analysis. The effects of plant density treatment (Ti; i = 1 [highest density], 2, 3, or 4 [lowest density]), row side (Sj; j = 1 [near] or 2 [far]), distance from the inoculum source (d; a continuous variable), and their interactions on fruit disease incidence (y; 0 to 1) were determined using a generalized linear model (GLM) with the program GLIM. Treatment and row side were considered categorical variables, with four and two levels, respectively, rather than continuous variables. Since increasing plant density inevitably affected more than just the leaf area or number of leaves (or fruit) per unit area of crop row, treating density as a continuous variable was deemed inappropriate. The logit link function for y was used as the response variable, and a binomial distribution for y was assumed. With the GLM, for a selected row side and treatment, the disease gradient can be expressed as ln[p/(1 – p)] = a′ – b′d, where p is the probability of a fruit being diseased, estimated with y, and ln[p/(1 – p)] is the logit link. This equation extends the exponential dispersal model when dealing with proportions; b′ is the slope (in units of reciprocal centimeters), indicating gradient steepness, and a′ represents the predicted ln[p/(1 – p)] at d = 0. Specifically, a′ = ln[p0/(1 – p0)], where p0 is the probability of a fruit being diseased at d = 0. Since d = 0 is not a measurable distance in this study (the smallest d with fruit is 30 cm, the midpoint of the 0- to 60-cm distance category), a′ is more simply interpreted as the height of the equation's line near the inoculum source, or the overall magnitude of disease incidence. If b′ varies among groups (e.g., treatments), the interpretation of a′ becomes more complex, as the lines are not parallel and the overall line height is less useful. Based on the estimated a′ and b′, the predicted distance at which a specific incidence occurs can be calculated. For example, d10, the predicted distance at which p = 0.10, is given by [a′ – ln(0.10/0.90)]/b′ = (a′ + 2.2)/b′.
The full generalized linear model (GLM) can be expressed as:
where
a is a constant (mean);
b is the slope of the disease gradient if no other terms are significant;
TSij represents the interaction of plant density treatment and row side for overall incidence; and
(bT)id,(bS)jd, and
(bTS)ijd are the interactions of
Ti,Sj, and
TSij with
d. This is analogous to an analysis of covariance with normal error statistical theory.
As an example of a reduced form of this model, if only
a,d, and
Sj were significant (i.e., all other terms in the equation are zero), then the height of the gradient line for each row side is given by
a
′
=a+Sj (i.e.,
a+S1 for the near side and
a+S2 for the far side), resulting in a single slope,
b
′
=b. Since there are only two levels for
Sj (near [
j=1] or far [
j=2] row side), the factor simplifies to a single implicit binary variable multiplied by a parameter (e.g.,
Sj=cX). Here,
c is an unknown parameter (to be estimated),
X=0 for the near row side, and
X=1 for the far side. For the near side,
S1=cX=c⋅0=0; for the far side,
S2=cX=c⋅1=c.
If
a,d,Sj, and
(bS)jd are significant, then the equation becomes:
This describes a line with height
a
′
=a+Sj and slope
b
′
=b−[bS]j dependent on row side (i.e., the adjustment to the overall slope takes on values of 0 for the near row side and a nonzero coefficient for the far side). Since the treatment has four levels, the factor
Ti represents three implicit variables, each consisting of zeros and ones, multiplied by coefficients, and the value of
Ti depends on the summation of the coefficients multiplied by the implicit binary variables. Standard terminology with GLMs uses symbols like
Ti for the pooled implicit variables. Maximum likelihood was used for parameter estimation, and the significance of all terms in the model was determined by an analysis of deviance. Specifically, a chi-square test was employed to determine the significance of the change in deviance as each term was added or removed from the model. The
Ti term represents four levels of plant density, and its deviance was partitioned into linear and nonlinear orthogonal components. Here, "nonlinear" refers to the density variable, not the parameters; by definition, the equation is linear in the parameters. A separate GLM was fitted to the data from each disease assessment and year.
The relationship between disease incidence per plot (totaled over all distances and row sides) and the number of fruit per plot (N) was further assessed for disease gradient studies of 1992 and 1993 using a separate GLM, expressed as:
The effects of density treatment (Ti) and rain episode time (Ek; k = 1, ...) on the proportion of incident rain penetrating the canopy (r) were determined using repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA), with Ek serving as the repeated measure. The response variable (r) was log-transformed prior to ANOVA to stabilize variances. A separate analysis was conducted for each year. The effects of plant density treatment on disease incidence of fruit inoculated in the laboratory and placed within the canopies were determined using a generalized linear model (GLM). A logit link function was employed, and the binomial distribution was assumed. Statistical methods for determining significance were consistent with those used for disease spread.
RESULTS
Incident rain and summary of environmental conditions: There was 10 mm of rain for the rain episode that immediately followed the placement of the infected source fruit in the field plots for the 1992 disease gradient study. Four additional rain events occurred up to June 26. The index of predicted infection for the first rain was 0.15. Average temperatures within the four treatment canopies for the 24 hours after the introduction of inoculum were 19.0, 19.0, 18.8, and 19.2°C for treatments 1 through 4, respectively. Over the entire period from the introduction of inoculum to the last assessment, mean temperatures were 18.5, 19.5, 18.1, and 18.6°C for treatments 1 through 4. The mean temperature outside the canopies was 19.7°C. The mean number of hours per day of surface wetness ranged from 8.1 to 8.5 for the four treatments and outside the row area. In 1993, there was 16 mm of rain immediately following the placement of inoculum in the field, with three more rain events by June 26. The index of predicted infection for the first rain was 0.90. Average temperatures for the 24 hours after the introduction of inoculum and for the entire period were, respectively, 17.6 and 21.2°C, 17.7 and 21.2°C, 17.8 and 21.6°C, 19.1 and 23.0°C, and 19.3 and 23.2°C for treatments 1 through 4 and the clear area outside the plots. Mean surface wetness duration per day was 5.0, 6.1, 6.1, 4.8, and 6.7 hours for treatments 1 through 4 and the clear area, respectively.
Disease gradients in 1992: For the first disease assessment, nine days after introducing infected fruit into the plots, mean fruit disease incidence (for all distances and row sides) ranged from 0.13 in treatment 1 (high plant density) to 0.21 in treatment 4 (low density). For subsequent assessments, mean disease incidence varied between 0.15 and 0.43. Incidence was from 1.7 to 2.4 times higher in the lower two density treatments compared to the higher two density treatments. As expected, there was a decline in mean incidence with distance from the inoculum source. For distances close to the inoculum source, incidence on the far side of plant rows (relative to the source) was less than on the near side of the rows for most density treatments
Equation 1 generally provided a good fit to fruit disease incidence in relation to distance. Examples for the near and far row sides of the high (treatment 1) and low (treatment 4) densities of the first assessment are shown in Figure 3. The full GLM (equation 2) explained from 82 to 96% of the deviance (i.e., variation) over all assessment times (Table 1). The main effects of distance (d), row side (S), and their interaction were all significant (P ≤ 0.05), confirming that disease incidence declined with distance, depended on row side (Fig. 2), and that the steepness of the disease gradient (slope of equation 1 [b′ = b – {bS}j]) depended on row side (Figs. 2 and 3).
Table 1 provides the analysis of deviance for the effects of distance from the inoculum, row side relative to the inoculum source, plant density treatment, and their interactions on the proportion of fruit infected by Colletotrichum acutatum for four disease assessments in each of 2 years. In the 1992 and 1993 assessments, the results show that the distance (d) effect was highly significant (P ≤ 0.01) for all time points, indicating that disease incidence decreased with increased distance from the inoculum. The row side (S) also had a significant effect on disease incidence, particularly in the earlier assessments. The interaction between row side and distance (S × d) was significant at some time points, reflecting the variability in disease incidence between the near and far sides of the plant rows.
The treatment effect (T) was significant at each time, demonstrating that plant density treatment influenced disease incidence. Further analysis showed that this effect was nonlinear in three of the four assessments, with the higher two plant densities showing similar low disease incidences, and the lower two densities exhibiting higher disease incidences.
In summary, the model and analyses show that disease incidence was influenced by distance from the inoculum, row side, and plant density treatment, with significant interactions between these factors affecting the overall disease spread.
Plant density treatment also affected the steepness of the disease gradients, as indicated by the significant interaction of treatment (Ti) and distance (d) (P ≤ 0.05). However, the effect was nonlinear. An example of this can be seen where the slopes in treatment 1 and treatment 4 differ for the same row side. Additionally, treatment and row side interacted, showing that the influence of row side was not the same for all plant density treatments. For instance, at the first assessment time, the near row side had a higher incidence than the far row side, except for the third treatment, where the two sides had virtually identical incidence. Moreover, at the first assessment time only, there was a significant three-way interaction.
Estimates of the intercept and slope of the relevant equation at each time for all combinations of treatment and row side are provided. These estimates are based on significant terms from the analysis and not individual regressions. Due to the various two- and three-way interactions, these values differ for each combination of treatment and row side. By definition, different values are significantly different (P ≤ 0.05). Except for the third density treatment, at some times, the intercept was higher for the near side (relative to the inoculum source) than the far side of the plant rows. Likewise, the slope was larger on the near than far row sides. Despite the higher mean disease incidence at the lower two plant density treatments compared to the higher two, the intercept values were generally low for the lower plant densities. However, the slope values were also lower, resulting in overall higher disease incidence for the lower two densities.
Using estimates of intercept and slope, a measure of disease spread (d10) was calculated and found to be strongly affected by treatment and row side. Generally, d10 was almost always higher for the near than far row sides; for instance, in the highest plant density at the first assessment, d10 was 159 and 69 cm for the near and far row sides, respectively. At the first assessment, d10 for the near side was from 1.2 to 2.3 times larger than for the far side. There was a general increase in d10 with decreasing plant row density. For example, d10 was 152 and 186 cm for the near row sides of high density and low density treatments, respectively, at the fourth assessment time.
Ten days after introducing infected fruit into the strawberry plots, average fruit disease incidence (across all distances and row sides) ranged from 0.08 in the high density treatment to 0.18 in the intermediate density treatment. For the latter three assessments, mean incidence ranged from 0.01 to 0.13. Overall, disease incidence was lower in 1993 than in 1992. There was a general decline in disease incidence with increasing distance from the source at all assessment times, and incidence for the near side of rows was often greater than for the far side of rows at distances close to the source. For the first and last assessments, disease incidence tended to be lower in high density plots compared with lower density plots; the highest incidence was found for an intermediate plant density treatment. For the second and third assessments, disease incidence was very low for all treatments, and density treatment effects were not obvious by simple inspection of t
Sj were significant (P ≤ 0.01) at all times. However, the interaction of these two factors was not significant (P > 0.10), indicating that the steepness of disease gradients (i.e., slope [b′] of equation 1) did not depend on the row side. Ti was significant (P ≤ 0.01) for three of four assessment times, but the linear component was only significant at the first and last times, in which there was an obvious lower mean incidence in treatment 1 than in the higher densities. For the first assessment time, the only significant interaction was for Ti and Sj (P ≤ 0.01), indicating that the height of the gradient, but not the steepness, depended on the specific combination of density treatment and row side. For the second time, no interactions were significant. Thus, for both times, estimated b′ was the same for all treatments and row sides, and a′ depended on treatment and row side. Because there was no Ti × Sj interaction for assessment time 2, the difference in a′ between the near and far row sides was the same for each density treatment (approximately 1.2 in logit scale) at this assessment time. At the third assessment time, which had low mean disease incidence, the Ti and Sj interaction, as well as the three-way interaction, were significant. This resulted in estimates of a′ and b′ being different for each combination of density treatment and row side. Nevertheless, a′ was lower for the far row side compared with the near side. At the last assessment time, there was one significant (P ≤ 0.01) interaction, Ti × d [(bT)id], indicating different estimates of b′ for each density treatment, but not row side.
The table details the estimated parameters of the generalized linear model fitted to the proportion of fruit infected by Colletotrichum acutatum across four disease assessments in each of two years. Each assessment includes data categorized by treatment and row side, with parameters a′ (intercept), b′ (slope), and d10 (predicted distance at which the probability of infection declines to 0.10). The values reflect the responses in different treatment conditions over the years 1992 and 1993, showing variations in infection rates based on the combination of density treatment and distance from the row. The data indicate significant differences in infection likelihood at various assessment times, demonstrating how factors like treatment density and proximity to the row influence disease progression.
Estimates of d10, based on a′ and b′, were always higher for the near row side than the far side. For instance, d10 equaled 131 and 106 cm for the near and far sides, respectively, of the high plant density treatment at the first assessment time. Generally, d10 increased with decreasing plant density, although the largest values were found in treatment 3 at the last two assessment times (e.g., d10 = 245 cm for treatment 3 at assessment time 4).
Regarding diseased fruit and total fruit, as expected from the fit of the equation to the data for each year, there was a highly significant (P ≤ 0.01) effect of the number of fruit per plot (N; fruit density) on disease incidence. The analysis provided an acceptable fit to the data for each year, although there was considerable variability since the experimental factors (treatments, etc.) were not considered directly in this analysis. Disease incidence declined with increasing N, and the greatest change in disease incidence occurred at low N. There was also a significant (P ≤ 0.01) relationship between the total number of diseased fruit per plot and N, and the analysis provided an acceptable fit to the data. The number of diseased fruit increased with N, although the greatest change was also observed at low N. For over three-quarters of the range of N, there was little change in diseased fruit with increasing fruit density. Because experimental factors were not considered, there was considerable variation around the curves.
In terms of rain attenuation, the plant density treatment had a significant effect (P ≤ 0.01) on the transformed proportion of rain that penetrated the row canopy. Both the linear and nonlinear components were significant (P ≤ 0.01), reflecting the large increase in the proportion from treatment 3 to treatment 4 (lowest plant density). Rain episode (time) also had a significant effect (P ≤ 0.01) on the proportion, indicating that the proportion of rain intercepted depended on the individual rain episode, although it generally declined over time. In the following year, the density treatment also significantly affected the transformed proportion of rain penetrating the row canopy. There was an increase in the proportion with decreasing plant density, and the linear component was significant (P ≤ 0.01), while the nonlinear component was not significant (P > 0.15).
In the second and third tests, plant density treatment did not have a significant effect (P > 0.05) on the disease incidence of fruit that had been inoculated in the laboratory and placed in the row canopies, based on a GLM analysis.
Means across all treatments were 0.21 (standard error [SE] = 0.036) and 0.11 (SE = 0.032) for tests 2 and 3, respectively. For the first test, incidence was significantly affected (P ≤ 0.05), and mean proportions of fruit infected for treatments 1 through 4 were 0.28 (SE = 0.087), 0.19 (SE = 0.086), 0.39 (SE = 0.062), and 0.56 (SE = 0.131), respectively. There were significant linear and nonlinear changes (P ≤ 0.05) in the proportion with decreasing plant density. The mean proportion of fruit infected of those exposed to ambient conditions outside the plant canopies was 0.66 (SE = 0.136).
DISCUSSION
Spread of anthracnose fruit rot was found in strawberry plots in each of the two years by determining disease gradients in relation to distance from introduced point sources of C. acutatum inoculum. Disease spread was strongly influenced by the canopy, as evidenced by the significant effect of canopy row side (relative to the inoculum source) and plant density treatment on the height and steepness of the disease gradients. The near side overall had a higher disease incidence than the far row side, and there was generally a negative, but nonlinear, relation between plant density and mean disease incidence. Rain attenuation was also directly related to plants per meter of row, but not necessarily in a linear manner. Although there were some differences between years in the complexity of the relationships between disease responses and row side or density treatment (reflected by the presence or absence of significant interactions), the results were in qualitative agreement. We previously showed, using a rain simulator, that plant density strongly affected splash dispersal of C. acutatum. Other work also shows that the plant canopy can affect aspects of splash dispersal. In Boudreau and Madden's study, the total number of spores deposited in samplers increased as plant density decreased from 100 to 50% of the maximum density tested. The number of deposited spores then decreased or remained constant as plant density was further decreased to one lower density. Results from the field study found here are consistent with the rain simulation experiment. That is, there was a clear nonlinear relationship between disease response (mean y, a′, b′, and d10) and plant density. In 1992, the mean disease incidence was low and similar for the higher two plant density treatments, and high and similar for the lower two densities. In 1993, mean disease incidence was low at the highest density (treatment 1) and reached its maximum at the next to the lowest density (treatment 3). For certain times, d10 reached its largest value at this same plant density (treatment 3). Unlike the rain simulation studies, our field investigation assessed disease development and not just spore dispersal. Nevertheless, we believe that differences in dispersal are responsible for most of the effects seen here. Post-deposition infection of fruit (for fruit inoculated in the laboratory and placed within the canopies) was affected by plant density treatment in only one of three tests in a single year of evaluation. In the test with the significant result, the relationship between absolute numbers of diseased fruit per plot (totaled across all distances and row sides) and the total number of fruit per plot (N) was analyzed, along with the mean proportion of diseased fruit per plot (incidence) in relation to N, in 1992 and 1993. Generalized linear models using log or logit link functions were fitted to t
Rain (ml cm–2) within the canopy was divided by rain (ml cm–2) over an open area to obtain proportions of the incident. Values are averages over rain episodes and replications. The post-deposition infection level was only roughly related to mean y from the disease gradient study. For instance, there was generally no difference in mean y between the lowest two plant densities in 1992, but the proportion of diseased fruit that had been inoculated in the laboratory and placed within the canopies differed significantly by 0.17 between these two densities (0.39 versus 0.56). Moreover, the latent period and time to symptom appearance varied only by approximately 2 days from 18 to 22°C, suggesting that the minor temperature differences among the four canopies would have little effect on fruit colonization. As mentioned in the introduction, three interacting mechanisms were previously postulated to explain the complicated and nonlinear effects of density on dispersal. This study was not designed to test these mechanisms, but the results do not indicate any reason to reject them. In particular, based on the observed disease gradients, it seems likely that increasing plant density decreased the resplash of spore-carrying splash droplets across the plots, reducing the probability of a spore being deposited on a susceptible fruit. The complexity of the previously found relationship was confirmed here as well. Dispersal in relation to rain attenuation is a case in point. In 1993, there was a linear increase in the proportion of rain penetrating the canopy with decreasing plant density, but the highest dispersal (i.e., highest mean y) often was found for the next to the lowest density. Moreover, a low proportion of rain penetrated the canopy of treatment 3 compared with treatment 4 in 1992, but there typically was little difference in mean disease incidence (y) between these two treatments. Rain penetration is assumed to be related, in part, to splash droplet transport through the canopy, although other work shows that there is a nonlinear relation between horizontal transport of water through the canopy and plant density. The GLM was found to be an acceptable way to represent disease spread. The model realistically accounted for the statistical distribution of y and permitted the testing of plant density, distance, and row-side effects on y. The logit link function was used based on statistical theory and our desire for the statistical model to reduce to the previously developed logistic disease spread model for a single plot. Although distance from the inoculum source and row side cannot be randomized, their large deviances make it clear that both terms strongly affected disease incidence. Based on the GLM with only significant terms, plant density treatment and row-side effects could be quantified using the calculated a′ and b′, or d10 for a combined result. The nonlinear relation between density and y was directly assessed using an orthogonal decomposition of the Ti (or interaction involving Ti). Furthermore, the interaction of Ti and Sj showed that, as expected, the magnitude of row-side effects depended on plant density. The most obvious manifestation of row side was seen by the large difference in a′ between the near and far sides.
Depending on the assessment time and year, the difference was either constant (when there were no interactions) or dependent on treatment. Moreover, the row-side effect was so strong that the mean value at 90 or 150 cm from the inoculum source on the near side of rows was often higher than the mean value at 30 cm from the source on the far side. Row side either did not affect gradient steepness, measured by b′ (three of four assessment times in 1993), or steepness was reduced from the near to the far side. In either case, d10 was almost always larger for the near than the far side. Decreasing plant density sometimes resulted in a decrease in a′ (i.e., lower disease incidence next to the inoculum source), even though mean incidence increased from the highest to lowest plant density (e.g., assessment time 1 in 1992). However, b′ also declined (i.e., became closer to zero) with decreasing plant density for some assessment times when b′ was not constant, resulting (in part) in increasing d10 with decreasing plant density. One implication of this combined result may be that a′ is lower with decreased plant density because spores are traveling greater distances (i.e., smaller b′) and are less restricted to infecting the fruit immediately adjacent to the source. However, full interpretation of row side and density effects on b′ requires an appraisal of the meaning of the parameter.
Equation 1 is an expansion of the simple exponential model, p = p0 exp(–b′d), and corrects for the upper limit to disease incidence (maximum p [or y] of 1). If the dependent variable of the exponential model is the number of spores (e.g., p representing spores per unit area, not the probability of a fruit being diseased), then b′–1 (centimeters) is the mean flight distance and a measure of the spatial scale of dispersal. Furthermore, at a distance of d = b′–1, p always equals 37% of the predicted value of p at d = 0 (i.e., p/p0 = 1/e ≈ 0.37) for the exponential model. The situation is more complicated for the logistic model; p/p0 at d = b′–1 depends on a′ (or, equivalently, p0). At small a′ (say, a′ ≈ –2, where p0 ≈ 0.12), p/p0 is 0.39 (about the same as the exponential); p/p0 is 0.54 when a′ = 0 (p0 = 0.5), 0.68 when a′ = 1 (p0 = 0.73), and 0.83 when a′ = 2 (p0 = 0.88). In other words, for high values of disease incidence near the source (i.e., large a′), incidence is still very high at a distance equal to b′–1. Thus, b′ generally should not be used alone to summarize spread. Comparison of b′ values depends on the magnitude of a′ (or, equivalently, p0).
Although there are arguments in favor of a positive relationship between plant density and disease intensity, empirical results are inconclusive. In some natural systems with a positive correlation, there is evidence that the correlation could be due to resource limitations for the host and pathogen (i.e., environmental interaction), rather than a direct effect of host density on pathogen dynamics. Theory from animal systems indicates that the rate of increase in absolute numbers of diseased individuals will increase with either (i) the absolute density of diseased (and healthy) individuals, or (ii) relative density of diseased (and healthy) individuals (e.g., proportion diseased), depending on the transmission mechanism. However, disease incidence or severity data (recorded as proportions) are standard in most botanical epidemiological studies, complicating interpretation, although proportion data have been used to support a positive correlation between plant density and disease. In our study, the number of diseased fruit generally increased with the increasing number of fruit per plot, as predicted. However, the general qualitative trend is less informative than the functional relationship. For instance, if the number of fruit per plot doubled (perhaps due to doubling the plants per plot), one would expect that the number of diseased fruit would also increase. However, the magnitude of the increase may be considerably less than the increase in total fruit, due to the sheltering of fruit by other fruit and plants, barrier effects on splash droplet movement, and a dilution of spore density per fruit. Thus, increases in diseased fruit at a magnitude less than the increase in total fruit, or a declining rate of increase in diseased fruit with increasing total fruit, are indications of a negative relationship between plant (or fruit) density and the probability of a fruit being diseased. There was very little increase in total diseased fruit with increasing N at values of N above 100. This is confirmed by the acceptable fit of the equation and negative estimated β, which indicates a declining rate of increase in diseased fruit with increasing N. There was, thus, a declining disease incidence with increasing N, as expected from the general trend of declining mean disease incidence with increasing plant density and the results of the full generalized linear model. For the epidemiological theory of Anderson and May to be fully relevant, there would need to be sufficient generations (within a season or over many years, depending on the pathosystem) for the disease to approach equilibria or asymptotic intensities. That is, there would need to be time for several generations of plant-to-plant (or fruit-to-fruit) spread. Many economically important diseases require this kind of temporal context
Vol. 87, No. 8, 1997
Diseases, however, are monocyclic, at least within a single year, and it is not clear from the limited empirical evidence reported to date how plant density would affect these situations. Obviously, increasing density will increase the probability of a propagule coming in contact with a plant unit immediately adjacent to the source of the propagules; however, at greater distances, the increased density will also increase the barriers (per unit of area) between propagules and plant units. Even immediately adjacent to the source, density effects are not certain. As discussed in the preceding paragraph, increasing density may result in more units becoming infected, but since the total number of units is increasing, the proportion diseased could be constant or decrease. There is clear evidence from some systems that dispersal of spores or other microscopic particles, such as pollen, declines with increasing plant density. Interestingly, some recent work showing no relation between plant density and disease in natural systems deals with heteroecious rusts on the host with no secondary spread. Thus, the effect seen would likely be due to altered dispersal with increasing density or altered environmental conditions.
With day length-sensitive strawberry cultivars (i.e., one generation of fruit per season) and an approximately 6- to 9-day latent period for anthracnose, there is time for only a small number of generations, and the disease under investigation here may behave more like a monocyclic than polycyclic disease, especially when ripe fruit are harvested. It is now well established that surface topography can have a dramatic effect on rain splash dispersal of fungal plant pathogens. Increasing roughness can often negate the effects of increasing rain amount or intensity on spore dispersal. For instance, a straw mulch, typically used for perennial strawberry production, drastically reduces disease spread in the field. Increasing plant density in the current study had a qualitatively similar effect as increasing roughness, although the magnitude of the effect was less for plant density manipulation. Although changing density alone, within the production constraints of a particular crop, may not be sufficient to manage diseases such as anthracnose, alteration of density could be used in conjunction with other practices to improve disease control. Additionally, density effects have a direct bearing on the use of cultivar mixtures for controlling anthracnose and other diseases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Salaries and support were provided by state and federal funds appropriated to the Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center, The Ohio State University, Wooster. We thank L. L. Wilson and W. King for technical assistance.
LITERATURE CITED
Burdon, J. J., Wennstrom, A., Ericson, L., Muller, W. J., and Morton, R. 1992. Density-dependent mortality in Pinus sylvestris caused by the snow blight pathogen Phacidium infestans. Oecologia 90:74-79.
Campbell, C. L., and Madden, L. V. 1990. Introduction to Plant Disease Epidemiology. John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Carlsson, U., Elmqvist, T., Wennström, A., and Ericson, L. 1990. Infection by pathogens and population age of host plants. J. Ecol. 78:1094-1105.
Chakraborty, S., Pettitt, A. N., Choy, S. L., and Boland, R. M. 1995. Spatial dependence in anthracnose development in mixtures of Stylosanthes scabra. J. Phytopathol. 143:693-699.
Collett, D. 1991. Modelling Binary Data. Chapman & Hall, London.
Crawley, M. J. 1993. GLIM for Ecologists. Blackwell Scientific, London.
de Nazareno, N., Madden, L. V., and Lipps, P. E. 1993. Characterization of gray leaf spot epidemics of maize. Z. Pflanzenkr. Pflanzenschutz 100:410-425.
Dobson, A., and Crawley, M. 1994. Pathogens and the structure of plant communities. Trends Ecol. Evol. 9:393-398.
Ferrandino, F. J. 1996. Length scale of disease spread: Fact or artifact of experimental geometry. Phytopathology 86:806-811.
Fitt, B. D. L., Inman, A. J., Lacey, M. E., and McCartney, H. A. 1992. Splash dispersal of spores of Pseudocercosporella capsellae (white leaf spot) from oilseed rape leaves of different inclination, flexibility, and age. Z. Pflanzenkr. Pflanzenschutz 99:1-15.
Fitt, B. D. L., McCartney, H. A., and Walklate, P. J. 1989. The role of rain in dispersal of pathogen inoculum. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 27:241-270.
Fry, W. E. 1982. Principles of Plant Disease Management. Academic Press, Inc., New York.
Funt, R. C. 1994. Ohio Strawberry Production, Management, and Marketing Manual. Ohio State University Extension, Columbus.
Garciaguzman, G., Burdon, J. J., Ash, J. E., and Cunningham, R. B. 1996. Regional and local patterns in the spatial distribution of the flower-infecting smut fungus Sporisorium amphilophis in natural populations of its host Bothriochloa macra. New Phytol. 132:459-469.
