Epidemiology and Pathology of Strawberry Anthracnose: A North American Perspective
Barbara J. Smith
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Thad Cochran Southern Horticultural Laboratory, Small Fruit Research Unit, P.O. Box 287, Poplarville, MS 39470
Additional index words: Colletotrichum acutatum, C. fragariae, C. gloeosporioides, Fragaria × ananassa, disease control, fungicides
Abstract: Three Colletotrichum species—Colletotrichum acutatum J.H. Simmonds (teleomorph Glomerella acutata J.C. Guerber & J.C. Correll), Colletotrichum fragariae A.N. Brooks, and Colletotrichum gloeosporioides (Penz.) Penz. & Sacc. in Penz. [teleomorph Glomerella cingulata (Stoneman) Spauld. & H. Schrenk]—are major pathogens of strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa). Strawberry anthracnose crown rot has been a destructive disease in commercial strawberry fields in the southeastern United States since the 1930s. The causal fungus, C. fragariae, may infect all aboveground plant parts; however, the disease is most severe when the fungus infects the crown, causing crown rot, wilt, and death. Colletotrichum gloeosporioides was responsible for an epidemic of anthracnose crown rot in strawberry nurseries in Arkansas and North Carolina in the late 1970s. The anthracnose fruit rot pathogen, C. acutatum, was first reported in 1986 on strawberry in the United States. Since the 1980s, increased losses due to anthracnose fruit and crown rots in the United States may be related to changes in cultivars and to the widespread use of annual plasticulture production rather than the matted-row production system. Investigations into anthracnose in the United States have concentrated on its epidemiology and differences among the three causal Colletotrichum species regarding their cultural, morphological, and molecular characteristics; infection processes; and pathogenicity. Results from these studies have led to a better understanding of the diseases and improved disease control. Strawberries grown in soils with high nitrogen levels are more susceptible to anthracnose than those grown in soils with lower nitrogen levels or those amended with calcium nitrate. Anthracnose spreads more rapidly in fields with overhead irrigation and plastic mulch than in fields using drip irrigation and straw mulch. Fungicide efficacy has been evaluated in in vitro, greenhouse, and field studies, and resistance to some fungicides has been detected in pathogens. Developing anthracnose-resistant cultivars is a major objective of most strawberry breeding programs in the southern United States.
Colletotrichum species cause serious diseases in many fruit and vegetable crops worldwide, and three species—C. fragariae, C. acutatum, and C. gloeosporioides—cause anthracnose diseases in strawberry. Since the 1930s, anthracnose crown rot caused by C. fragariae and C. gloeosporioides has been a destructive disease in strawberry nurseries and fruit production fields in the southeastern United States. In 1986, the presence of the anthracnose fruit rot pathogen, C. acutatum, was first reported on strawberry in the United States. Increased losses due to anthracnose fruit and crown rots since the 1980s may be attributed to the shift from matted-row culture to the annual plasticulture production system, as well as to changes in cultivars. Anthracnose diseases are becoming increasingly important, re
Colletotrichum fragariae, C. acutatum, and C. gloeosporioides cause anthracnose diseases of strawberries. C. fragariae was assumed to be the causal agent of strawberry anthracnose in the United States until 1986, when Smith and Black reported the presence of C. acutatum on strawberries in the United States. This fungus had previously been reported to cause anthracnose fruit rot of strawberries in Queensland, Australia; however, it had probably been present in the United States for some time under the name Gloeosporium spp. Colletotrichum gloeosporioides causes anthracnose crown rot, petiole lesions, and leaf spots indistinguishable from those caused by C. fragariae. In a series of comparative studies of these three major causal agents of strawberry anthracnose, Smith and Black examined the cultural characteristics, conidia, appressoria, and setae of 24 Colletotrichum isolates. Colletotrichum fragariae isolates developed beige to olive to dark gray colonies, did not form the ascigerous state in culture, and their conidia were typically cylindrical, with one end sharply tapered and the other end rounded. Colletotrichum gloeosporioides isolates were very similar, except they formed the Glomerella cingulata ascigerous state in culture, and their conidia usually were rounded on both ends. Isolates of both C. fragariae and C. gloeosporioides produced dark black setae, visible with a hand lens, in acervuli in culture and on petiole, stolon, and fruit lesions. Colletotrichum acutatum isolates produced fusiform conidia tapered on both ends, developed white, pink, orange, rose, or beige colonies, and did not form setae or the ascigerous state in culture. The growth rate of C. acutatum in culture was slower than the other two species at all temperatures tested, with the greatest difference being at 32 °C. Colletotrichum fragariae, the “original” anthracnose fungus, was first identified in Florida in 1931. It spread throughout the southeastern United States and was responsible for crown rot and death of many plants in strawberry nurseries in the 1970s. It has a narrow host range, infecting only strawberries and a few weed hosts, and is rarely found outside the southeastern United States. Colletotrichum fragariae generally causes more severe petiole and crown symptoms than C. acutatum, and C. fragariae is considered by some to be a host-specific or con-specific form of C. gloeosporioides. In the late 1970s, C. gloeosporioides was identified as the causal agent on plants obtained from Arkansas and North Carolina nurseries that died from a crown rot identical to that caused by C. fragariae. It has a wide host and geographic range, causing diseases of many plant hosts worldwide. The greatest economic losses due to anthracnose on strawberries are from fruit rot caused by C. acutatum, which also infects many other fruit and vegetable crops, including apples, tomatoes, peppers, peaches, blueberries, blackberries, and grapes. The presence of the pathogen has been reported on strawberries in almost all areas of the world where they are grown. Crown infections of strawberry plants by C. acutatum often result in stunted plants rather than plant death. Infected plants usually do not thrive after transplantation and produce few berries at harvest.
Historically, C. acutatum has been considered the anthracnose fruit-rotting pathogen, while C. fragariae and C. gloeosporioides have been associated with petiole and stolon lesions as well as crown rot. However, all three species can cause similar symptoms and may be found on the same plant (Howard et al., 1992). Identification of these pathogens should rely on classical taxonomic characteristics or molecular techniques rather than symptoms. Several studies suggest that C. acutatum may have evolved into a subgroup that is highly virulent and host-specific to strawberries. In one such study (Denoyes-Rothan et al., 2002), 95 isolates of Colletotrichum, including 81 isolates of C. acutatum (62 from strawberry) and 14 isolates of C. gloeosporioides (13 from strawberry), were characterized using various molecular methods and pathogenicity tests. Results based on random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD) polymorphism and internal transcribed spacer 2 (ITS2) sequence data provided genetic evidence of two subgroups within C. acutatum. The first subgroup, termed CA-clonal, included only isolates from strawberries and exhibited identical RAPD patterns along with nearly identical ITS2 sequence analyses. A larger genetic group, CA-variable, included isolates from various hosts and showed variable RAPD patterns and divergent ITS2 sequence analyses. Based on these molecular data, Denoyes-Rothan et al. (2002) proposed that the CA-clonal subgroup contained closely related, highly virulent C. acutatum isolates that may have developed host specialization to strawberries. Isolates of Colletotrichum spp. have been disseminated worldwide, likely through international plant exchanges, as their genetic polymorphism and geographical origins are not correlated (Denoyes-Rothan et al., 2002; Sreenivasaprasad and Talhinhas, 2005).
Anthracnose Disease Symptoms
Anthracnose crown rot (Smith, 1998a), caused by either C. fragariae or C. gloeosporioides, is first noticeable by the wilting of the youngest leaves during the hottest part of the day. The young wilted leaves may seem to recover and become turgid in the evenings; however, most will wilt and die after a few days. Shortly after wilting, a red discoloration appears within the crown tissue, and the causal pathogen may be isolated from discolored tissue. After several days, the crown tissue will turn dark brown to black, making it difficult to isolate Colletotrichum spp. Colletotrichum acutatum may also cause crown death; however, typically only one side of the crown is infected rather than the entire crown, leading to stunted but not dead plants. Each of the three Colletotrichum spp. may cause petiole and stolon lesions, which are dark brown or black, sunken, and often girdle the petiole or stolon. Pink masses of conidia are usually visible near the center of each lesion. All three species also cause leaf spots (Howard et al., 1992; Maas and Palm, 1997; Smith, 1998c). Black leaf spot, typically caused by C. fragariae and C. gloeosporioides, is characterized by gray or light black spots that are usually not necrotic and peppered across the top surface of the strawberry leaflets. C. acutatum more commonly causes irregular leaf spots, prima
C. acutatum and C. fragariae using light and electron microscopy. Both fungal species invaded the host tissue in a similar manner; however, C. fragariae invaded the plants more rapidly than C. acutatum. Both species penetrated the cuticle via an appressorium, and their hyphae grew within the cuticle and cell walls of epidermal, subepidermal, and subtending cells. They began invasion with a brief biotrophic phase, during which they invaded living cells, before entering an extended necrotrophic phase, in which they proliferated among dead cells. Acervuli formed once the cortical tissue had been moderately disrupted and developed as a stroma just beneath the outer periclinal epidermal walls. Acervuli erupted through the cuticle and released conidia. Invasion of the vascular tissue typically occurred after acervuli matured but remained minimal. The time from infection of the strawberry by Colletotrichum spp. to first sporulation (the latent period) is an important factor in the speed at which anthracnose may spread within a field. The latent period depends on temperature and ranges from 2–3 days at 25 °C to 6–17 days at 5 °C. At 5 and 10 °C, the latent period was shorter for C. acutatum than for C. gloeosporioides and C. fragariae; however, at higher temperatures, the latent period for all species was similar. Appressoria and secondary conidia produced by C. acutatum on symptomless foliage may be a significant source of inoculum for fruit infections and may also contribute to the availability of inoculum throughout the growing season. Conidial germination, appressorial production, and secondary conidiation are all favored by longer periods of wetness than the 4 hours required for secondary conidia to form. Colletotrichum acutatum survived up to 8 weeks on leaves in greenhouse studies and up to 5 weeks on fabric. More conidia formed on leaves when exposed to flower extracts than when exposed to leaf extracts or water, suggesting that C. acutatum inoculum levels on strawberry foliage may increase during flowering. Rain splash is the primary means by which Colletotrichum spp. conidia are spread from plant to plant in the field. It was found that anthracnose fruit rot incidence generally declined as plant density increased, leading to the conclusion that plant density reduced the amount of rain that penetrated the plant canopy, thus reducing splash. Most fruit infections occurred within a 25-cm radius of the inoculum source, which was an infected fruit. In a study of splash dispersal of the conidia of the three Colletotrichum spp., it was found that conidia of C. fragariae dispersed over the shortest distance and those of C. acutatum dispersed over the longest distance. This was probably due to the greater amount of spores produced on infected fruit by C. acutatum. Colletotrichum acutatum conidia may survive in soil and plant debr
(1992a) demonstrated that anthracnose-free transplants can be produced in the southeastern United States by locating nurseries in areas where strawberries are not grown commercially. Disease-free transplants remain the primary control method for anthracnose crown rot and fruit rot. Because Colletotrichum spp. may infect many other hosts, primary infection in strawberry fields is sometimes assumed to come from these other hosts growing nearby. To test the hypothesis that Colletotrichum spp. may move from other fruit or vegetable hosts to strawberries, 37 Colletotrichum isolates representing nine species collected from 12 hosts were wound-inoculated onto the leaves and stems of strawberry, blueberry, blackberry, muscadine grape, tomato, and pepper (Smith, 2002). Colletotrichum fragariae isolates were the most aggressive, causing lesions at an average of 38% of inoculation sites on all hosts except pepper. Percentages of infection for the other species were 25% for Colletotrichum capsici, 18% for C. gloeosporioides, 15% for C. acutatum, 11% for C. destructivum, 9% for C. truncatum, 8% for C. coccodes, 6% for C. higginsianum, and 5% for C. orbiculare. Strawberry was the most susceptible host, with 58% of petiole and 14% of leaf inoculations of all isolates resulting in lesion development. Pepper was the most resistant host, with no symptom development on leaves or stems following inoculation with any isolate. These results suggest that primary anthracnose infections in strawberry fields are most often from infected strawberry transplants and only rarely from other diseased fruit or vegetable hosts. Anthracnose spreads within a field by splashing water, and living mulches (such as wheat, rye, or ryegrass) in row middles have been shown to reduce disease spread. Sublethal doses of grass-specific herbicides such as sethoxydim may be used to prevent excessive growth of ryegrass (Gupton, 2000). Organic mulches, such as wheat straw or pine needles, will also reduce splash and result in a lower incidence of anthracnose compared to rows mulched with plastic (Madden, 1992; Smith and Spiers, 1986). Anthracnose is less severe when water is supplied to plants using drip irrigation rather than overhead irrigation (Madden, 1992; Smith and Spiers, 1986). Anthracnose crown rot was observed to be less severe in commercial fields when strawberries were grown on soils with low nitrogen fertility (Howard et al., 1992). In greenhouse studies, Smith (1987, 1989) determined that strawberries grown in soils with high levels of nitrogen, especially from ammonium sources, are more susceptible to anthracnose than plants grown in soils with lower nitrogen levels or those with high levels of calcium nitrate. Anthracnose fruit rot caused by C. acutatum was less severe on fruit from greenhouse-grown plants receiving drench or foliar applications of calcium sulfate than on fruit from plants receiving water, calcium chloride, or calcium nitrate treatments. Fruit from plants receiving foliar applications of CaCl2 developed less fruit rot than that from plants receiving soil applications of CaCl2 (Smith and Gupton, 1993). The primary means to reduce the buildup of anthracnose fruit rot in the field is to harvest fruit frequently and remove all rotten fruit. Following severe infections early in the fruiting season, all infected fruit should be stripped from the plants and removed from the field. Infected areas of a field should be harvested last in the day, or workers should wash up and change into clean clothes when they must enter uninfected areas after harvesting areas where fruit rot is present. IN-VITRO FUNGICIDE STUDIES
Until highly resistant cultivars are available, growers must rely on chemical applications and cultural practices to reduce losses due to anthracnose. The failure of fungicides to control anthracnose epidemics may be due to the development of fungicide resistance in the Colletotrichum spp. population. For example, benomyl was shown to effectively reduce the incidence of anthracnose crown rot and was used intensively by strawberry growers for years to control anthracnose and other diseases. However, the anthracnose pathogens, C. acutatum and C. fragariae, developed resistance to it and other benzimidazole fungicides, and benomyl was no longer effective for anthracnose control in strawberry fields. In vitro trials have been used to screen fungicides for their ability to control anthracnose. It was reported that all 16 C. acutatum, 14 out of 18 C. fragariae, and both C. gloeosporioides isolates tested in vitro were resistant to benomyl, and all benomyl-resistant isolates were also resistant to carbendazim, which is in the same class of fungicides as benomyl. In a greenhouse study, plants treated with propiconazole had lower disease severity ratings than did plants treated with captafol or benomyl. However, the propiconazole-treated plants were shorter with dark green leaves that appeared thicker than the leaves of untreated plants.
Sixteen different fungicide treatments were evaluated in five fungicide studies conducted in Hammond, LA, and Poplarville, MS, during the 2002, 2003, and 2005 fruiting seasons. Treatments were applied at 7- to 10-day intervals to three strawberry cultivars. The most frequent fruit rots at harvest were anthracnose fruit rot (caused by Colletotrichum spp.), stem end rot (caused by Gnomonia comari), and Botrytis gray mold (caused by Botrytis cinerea). Compared with the untreated control treatment, less anthracnose fruit rot occurred on berries from the pyraclostrobin + boscalid, cyprodinil + fludioxonil, azoxystrobin, pyraclostrobin, captan + fenhexamid, and captan treatments.
In the early 1980s, when anthracnose became a major disease of strawberries in the southeastern United States, a breeding program to develop anthracnose-resistant cultivars adapted to the strawberry-growing areas in the southeastern United States was instituted by the USDA-ARS at the Small Fruit Research Station in Poplarville, MS, and the Fruit Laboratory in Beltsville, MD, with the collaboration of state experiment stations in Florida, Louisiana, and North Carolina. From 1976 to 1995, over 160,000 progeny from 448 crosses made at Beltsville, primarily by G.J. Galletta, were screened for anthracnose resistance in the greenhouse at Poplarville. Initially, parent lines were eastern cultivars and advanced selections from the breeding program at Beltsville. As the program progressed, resistant selections from the anthracnose program were crossed with commercial cultivars to improve the horticultural characteristics of the progeny. Seed from the crosses made at Beltsville were germinated at Poplarville, and resultant seedlings were inoculated with a conidial suspension of C. fragariae, incubated in a dew chamber for 48 hours, moved to a warm greenhouse, and rated for anthracnose severity 30 days after inoculation. Resistant seedlings were evaluated in the field in Florida and Louisiana.
Mississippi, Maryland, and North Carolina selections were made based on yield, fruit quality, plant habit, and resistance to leaf scorch (caused by Diplocarpon earlianum), leaf spot (caused by Mycosphaerella fragariae), powdery mildew (caused by Sphaerotheca macularis), and two-spotted spider mites (Tetranychus urticae). Fifteen hundred fifteen (1,515) anthracnose-resistant selections were made from seedlings field-tested in Mississippi. Four of these anthracnose-resistant strawberry clones were released as breeding lines and have been used as sources of anthracnose resistance in several breeding programs. One cultivar, Pelican, which is highly resistant to both anthracnose crown rot and anthracnose fruit rot, was released. ‘Pelican’ is also resistant to five races of red stele caused by Phytophthora fragariae. The evaluation of strawberry seedlings and advanced breeding lines from state and private breeding programs is an ongoing project. The USDA anthracnose-resistance screening procedure has effectively identified resistant genotypes in seedling progenies from the North Carolina State University breeding program, with over 32,000 resistant strawberry seedlings identified between 1998 and 1999.
Research indicated that resistance to C. fragariae was influenced by environmental conditions after inoculation. Plants incubated at a high temperature (35 °C) for 48 hours in a dew chamber with near 100% relative humidity had higher disease severity ratings compared to those incubated at 25 or 30 °C. Plants maintained in a greenhouse at 32 °C after dew chamber incubation developed more severe symptoms than those held at 25 °C. Two- to four-week-old strawberry seedlings were more susceptible to C. fragariae than 14- to 18-week-old seedlings when spray inoculated with a conidial suspension. Tissue culture-induced (somaclonal) variation is another strategy being pursued for generating disease-resistant genotypes. Research screened shoots regenerated from leaf explants of six commercially important cultivars for resistance to a virulent isolate of C. acutatum. Somaclones with higher levels of anthracnose resistance were identified for all cultivars, with the greatest increases observed for somaclones of Chandler, Pelican, and Sweet Charlie, where resistance increased twelvefold. These studies provide evidence that in-vitro screening can evaluate strawberry germplasm for anthracnose resistance and that somaclonal variation is influenced by strawberry genotype.
In examining the inheritance of resistance to anthracnose, it was determined that estimates of dominance genetic variance were six to ten times higher than those for additive genetic variance. The frequency distribution of disease severity ratings was bimodal, suggesting major gene action. Narrow-sense heritability estimates of 0.37 and 0.26 were likely sufficient to produce gains from recurrent selection, while gains from the selection of clonal value should be possible due to high broad-sense heritability estimates.
Ballington (2002) found that nonadditive effects were more important than additive effects in the inheritance of resistance in runners. The epistatic nature of anthracnose resistance in runners is supported by results from crosses between susceptible parents, which yield up to 20% resistant seedlings (Ballington et al., 2002). Giménez and Ballington (2002) noted that the frequency distribution of lesion lengths within progenies suggests that resistance to Colletotrichum acutatum in runners is quantitative. Results from Garcés et al. (2002) also support the theory that the inheritance of resistance to anthracnose is quantitative in nature. Increased losses from anthracnose fruit and crown rots may be associated with the transition from matted-row culture to the annual plasticulture production system in the United States. Breeding for genetic resistance to anthracnose and the development of resistant cultivars are primary strategies for reducing economic losses due to this disease, making it environmentally sound by decreasing fungicide usage.
As our understanding of anthracnose pathogens and the epidemiology of anthracnose diseases has improved, so has our ability to control these diseases. Changes in cultural practices have led to reduced disease levels. Concurrently, the development of more effective fungicides and their registration for use on strawberries have significantly diminished losses from both anthracnose crown rot and fruit rot. Anthracnose-resistant cultivars have also contributed to reduced economic losses. Nevertheless, growers may still face substantial losses when environmental conditions are highly favorable for anthracnose development.
Literature cited includes studies on the genetic resistance to anthracnose in strawberries, characteristics of Colletotrichum from various hosts, and the genetic diversity among Colletotrichum species affecting strawberry plants. Notable works discuss the USDA strawberry breeding program, the resistance of specific strawberry parent clones, and the in vitro response of strawberry cultivars to Colletotrichum acutatum.
Control of the crown rot phase of strawberry anthracnose can be achieved through sanitation, breeding for resistance, and the use of benomyl. Howard (1971) demonstrated that benomyl effectively controls strawberry anthracnose (Plant Dis. Rep. 55:139–141). Howard (1983) noted that black leaf spot phase of strawberry anthracnose is caused by Colletotrichum gloeosporioides (Plant Dis. 67:1144–1146). Howard, Maas, Chandler, and Albregts (1992) discussed the anthracnose of strawberry caused by the Colletotrichum complex in Florida (Plant Dis. 76:976–981). King et al. (1997) examined the effects of temperature on sporulation and latent period of Colletotrichum spp. infecting strawberry fruit (Plant Dis. 81:77–84). LaMondia (1993) evaluated fungicides against Colletotrichum acutatum isolates from strawberry (Adv. Strawberry Res. 12:34–37). In 1995, LaMondia studied the inhibition of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. fragariae growth in vitro by benomyl, noting its effectiveness against benomyl-resistant isolates (Adv. Strawberry Res. 14:25–30).
Leandro et al. (2001) investigated germination and sporulation of Colletotrichum acutatum on symptomless strawberry leaves (Phytopathology 91:659–664). The same group (2003a) studied the influence of temperature and wetness duration on conidia and appressoria of Colletotrichum acutatum (Phytopathology 93:513–520), while Leandro et al. (2003b) found that strawberry plant extracts stimulate secondary conidiation by Colletotrichum acutatum (Phytopathology 93:1285–1291).
Maas (1984) provided insights into anthracnose fruit rot (black spot) in the Compendium of Strawberry Diseases (p. 57–60). Maas and Palm (1997) reported the occurrence of anthracnose irregular leaf spot caused by Colletotrichum acutatum on strawberry in Maryland (Adv. Strawberry Res. 16:68–70). Madden (1992) explored rainfall and fungal spore dispersal (Adv. Plant Pathol. 8:39–79), while Madden and Boudreau (1997) assessed the effect of strawberry density on anthracnose spread (Phytopathology 87:828–838). Additionally, Madden and Wilson (1997) examined how rain distribution alters splash dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum (Phytopathology 87:649–655).
McInnes et al. (1992a) focused on disease-free plants for managing strawberry anthracnose crown rot (Plant Dis. 76:260–264) and in 1992b investigated fungicides for crown rot control in summer nurseries (Adv. Strawberry Res. 11:12–16). Norman and Strandberg (1997) studied the survival of Colletotrichum acutatum in soil and plant debris of leatherleaf
Smith, B.J. 1998b. Anthracnose fruit rot (black spot), p. 31–33. In: J.L. Maas (ed.). Compendium of strawberry diseases. 2nd ed. American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. Smith, B.J. 1998c. Anthracnose leaf spot and irregular leaf spot, p. 24–25. In: J.L. Maas (ed.). Compendium of strawberry diseases. 2nd ed. American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. Smith, B.J. 2002. Susceptibility of vegetative tissues of fruit and vegetable hosts to infection by various Colletotrichum species. Acta Hort. 567:631–634. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1986. First report of Colletotrichum acutatum on strawberry in the United States. Plant Dis. 70:1074. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1987. Resistance of strawberry plants to Colletotrichum fragariae affected by environmental conditions. Plant Dis. 71:834–837. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1990. Morphological, cultural, and pathogenic variation among Colletotrichum species isolated from strawberry. Plant Dis. 74:69–76. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1991. Greenhouse efficacy of fungicides for control of anthracnose crown rot of strawberry, p. 221–223. In: A. Dale and J. Lubby (eds.). The strawberry into the 21st century. Timber Press, Portland, OR. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1992. In vitro activity of fungicides against Colletotrichum fragariae. Acta Hort. 348:509–512. Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1993. In vitro fungicide studies show the occurrence of benomyl-resistant Colletotrichum spp. from strawberry. Adv. Strawberry Res. 12:42–48. Smith, B.J., L.L. Black, and G.J. Galletta. 1990. Resistance to Colletotrichum fragariae in strawberry affected by seedling age and inoculation method. Plant Dis. 74:1016–1021. Smith, B.J. and C.L. Gupton. 1993. Calcium applications before harvest affect the severity of anthracnose fruit rot in greenhouse-grown strawberries. Acta Hort. 348:477–482. Smith, B.J., C.L. Gupton, G.J. Galletta, J.L. Maas, J.M. Enns, J.R. Ballington, Jr., R.J. Constantin, T.J. DiVittorio, and D. Himelrick. 1998. ‘Pelican’ strawberry. HortScience 33:1082–1084. Smith, B.J. and J.M. Spiers. 1982. Evaluating techniques for screening strawberry seedlings for resistance to Colletotrichum fragariae. Plant Dis. 66:559–561. Smith, B.J. and J.M. Spiers. 1986. Influence of mulch and irrigation types on strawberry anthracnose crown rot. HortScience 21:946 (abstr.). Sreenivasaprasad, S. and P. Talhinhas. 2005. Genotypic and phenotypic diversity in Colletotrichum acutatum, a cosmopolitan pathogen causing anthracnose on a wide range of hosts. Mol. Plant Pathol. 6:361–378. Sutton, B.C. 1992. The genus Glomerella and its anamorph Colletotrichum, p. 1–26. In: J.A. Bailey and M.J. Jeger (eds.). Colletotrichum: biology, pathology and control. CAB International,
