Disease Notes
Corynespora Bract Spot of Euphorbia pulcherrima in Florida. A. R. Chase, IFAS, University of Florida Agriculture and Research Education Center, Apopka 32703, and G. W. Simone, Department of Plant Pathology, University of Florida, Gainesville 32611. Plant Disease 70:1074, 1986. Accepted for publication 11 July 1986. A bract spot of poinsettia (Euphorbia pulcherrima Willd.) has occurred each winter since 1982 in central Florida nurseries. Black lesions up to 3 cm in diameter appear on bract margins and tips and sometimes on leaves, often resulting in plant loss. Isolations yielded Corynespora cassiicola (Berk. & Curt.) Wei. Five poinsettias each were inoculated with one of four conidial suspensions (1 X 10^4/ml) or water to runoff under intermittent mist for 24 hours before and 14 days after inoculation. Typical lesions occurred on bracts of plants inoculated with C. cassiicola, and the pathogen was reisolated from symptomatic tissue only. Inoculations of poinsettia with isolates of C. cassiicola from Aeschynanthus pulcher (Blume) G. Don, Ficus benjamina L., Ligustrum sinense Lour., Lycopersicon esculentum L. (Mill.) Karst ex Fariv., and Saintpaulia ionantha H. Wendl. resulted in typical bract spot for each isolate within 14 days. No indication of host specificity was noted. Also, the Argentine material did not show persistent appressoria in the outer stomatal chambers or filamentous hyphae in the diseased spongy mesophyll, characteristics of Mycosphaerella citri. Another difference from greasy spot was the presence of numerous, as yet unidentified spherical structures 2-12 µm in diameter in and near the necrotic mesophyll tissue, mostly just within the lower epidermis. Although the disease in Argentina is not caused by M. citri, a fungal cause is still considered probable because foliar applications of copper fungicides provide good control.
First Report of Colletotrichum acutatum on Strawberry in the United States. B. J. Smith, USDA-ARS, Poplarville, MS 39470, and L.L. Black, Department of Plant Pathology and Crop Physiology, Louisiana State University Agricultural Center, Baton Rouge 70803. Plant Disease 70:1074, 1986. Accepted for publication 11 July 1986.
First Report of Ascochyta Leaf Spot Caused by Ascochyta hordei var. americana on Barley in New York. C. S. Huftalen and G. C. Bergstrom, Department of Plant Pathology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853. Plant Disease 70:1074, 1986. Accepted for publication 2 July 1986.
Colletotrichum acutatum was isolated during the spring of 1983 from strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa Duch. 'Cardinal') growing in Mississippi fields established with nursery plants from Arkansas. Fruit and petiole lesions were common, and crown lesions occurred on scatt
During March and April of 1984, 1985, and 1986, irregular-shaped lesions were consistently observed from each of these lesion types. Additional isolates, tan lesions with associated chlorosis, were identified in our laboratory as C. acutatum and came from Florida and Missouri strawberry fields established with early tillering in breeding nurseries near Ithaca, New York. The fungus Ascochyta hordei Hara var. americana Punith was consistently isolated from Arkansas-grown plants and from California fields. Spray inoculations of cv. Tioga plants with conidial suspensions (1.5 × 10^6 conidia/ml) resulted in fruit, petiole, and crown lesions, with darkened cells around the ostiole. Conidia were medianly uniseptate, hyaline to pale yellow, and measured 25.2 ± 1.8 µm in length and 5.5 ± 0.4 µm in width. Pathogenicity was confirmed on seedlings of Birka barley, and the fungus was successfully reisolated. To our knowledge, this is the first report of this fungus causing disease on any cereal in the northeastern United States. C. acutatum had been reported on strawberry in Australia and New Zealand but has not been reported on strawberry in the United States or shown to cause crown rot and wilt disease. A. hordei is regarded as a minor pathogen on barley and wheat in northwestern states. Symptom development did not progress past the lower leaves on any of the plants we observed. The incidence of this disease may be underestimated because of the similarity of foliar symptoms to those induced by frost injury.
A virus isolated from tomato plants (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.) in central Arkansas showing leaf mottling and distortion was tentatively identified as tomato aspermy virus (TAV) by routine serological tests. The disease was initially recognized in the United States in 1981 and 1982 in California and Florida, respectively. The disease was first observed in Louisiana in field-grown tomatoes ('Florader') during the spring of 1983 and has since been seen each year in several areas of the state. Diseased plants exhibited symptoms that included mottling and distortion. Comparisons of this virus (TAV-A) with TAV-C from Canada showed the two isolates to be similar or identical in biological, biophysical, and biochemical properties. Purified preparations of TAV-A and TAV-C had sedimentation coefficients of 97 and 98 S, and protein subunit molecular weights of 26,600 and 26,500, respectively.
Both viruses are icosahedral particles, 28 nm in diameter, containing elliptical DNA and peptidic lesions, which lead to splitting and hollow stem development. These occurrences were noted in tomato fields. P. corrugata, a non-fluorescent pseudomonad, was consistently isolated from diseased tissues and incited similar symptoms in extensive host range studies. This is the first report of TAV in Arkansas. The isolate is considered to be identical to TAV-C. It produced pith necrosis when injected (0.5 ml, 10^7 cfu/ml) into 4-week-old, greenhouse-grown 'Bonny Best' tomato plants. Cultural, biochemical, and physiological characteristics of two Louisiana isolates of the bacterium were similar in comparative studies to those of known isolates of P. corrugata from Florida. The publication costs of these articles were partially covered by page charge payments. These articles must therefore be marked "advertisement" in accordance with U.S.C. § 1734 solely to indicate this fact.
