Investigation of the Colletotrichum gloeosporioides Species Complex Causing Peach Anthracnose in South Carolina
Meng-Jun Hu, Anja Grabke, and Guido Schnabel, School of Agricultural, Forest and Environmental Sciences, Clemson University, Clemson, SC 29634
Abstract
Hu, M.-J., Grabke, A., and Schnabel, G. 2015. Investigation of the Colletotrichum gloeosporioides species complex causing anthracnose fruit rot of peach in South Carolina. Plant Dis. 99:797-805. Colletotrichum gloeosporioides, C. acutatum, and C. truncatum are causal agents of anthracnose disease of peach in South Carolina. More recent investigations show that C. gloeosporioides is a species complex that has not yet been thoroughly investigated among peach isolates. A total of 28 Colletotrichum spp. isolates associated with peach fruit anthracnose were collected in 2012 from Chesnee (10 isolates), McBee (10 isolates), Monetta (2 isolates), and Ridge Spring (6 isolates), South Carolina. Morphological characteristics indicated that all 28 isolates belonged to the C. gloeosporioides species complex. Phylogenetic analysis of combined calmodulin (CAL), glyceraldehyde-3 phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), and β-tubulin (TUB2) gene sequences identified two species, C. siamense and C. fructicola. Cultural characteristics such as colony growth rate, shape and size of conidia, and appressoria from representative isolates of the two species largely matched previous descriptions for C. siamense and C. fructicola. Koch’s postulates for C. siamense and C. fructicola were fulfilled, confirming the pathogenicity of the two species on peach. A new two-step multiplex PCR assay was developed to facilitate differentiation of the four known Colletotrichum spp. causing anthracnose of peach in South Carolina, including C. acutatum, C. truncatum, C. siamense, and C. fructicola. The first step distinguished C. acutatum from C. truncatum and the two members of the C. gloeosporioides species complex. The second assay distinguished C. siamense from C. fructicola isolates. The filamentous fungal plant pathogen Colletotrichum gloeosporioides (Penz.) Penz. & Sacc. in Penz. (teleomorph = Glomerella cingulata (Stoneman) Spauld. & H. Schrenk) causes anthracnose disease on various fruits including peach, blueberry, strawberry
Therefore, it is not sufficient to identify fungal species only based on morphological features. Penzig (1882) first proposed the name Colletotrichum gloeosporioides based on Vermicularia gloeosporioides, which was collected from citrus in Italy. Von Arx (1957) defined C. gloeosporioides as the anamorph of all fungi with the G. cingulata teleomorph and artificially expanded the spore size range for C. gloeosporioides to overcome the instability of spore morphology from different hosts or measured under different cultural conditions. Consequently, large numbers of Colletotrichum strains with cylindrical conidia from various studies were synonymized with the name C. gloeosporioides. Some of this synonymy was subsequently found to be incorrect. For example, C. acutatum and C. boninense were segregated from C. gloeosporioides defined by von Arx. Additionally, several species regarded as synonyms of the C. gloeosporioides sensu von Arx were later identified as members of the C. acutatum or the C. boninense species complex. Cannon et al. used a C. gloeosporioides isolate from an Italian orange as an epitype. Living strains and sequence data are available from the epitype, enabling comparisons of Colletotrichum isolates by DNA sequence analyses to identify species, overcoming the inadequacies of traditional morphological identification. More than 86% of the ITS sequences from isolates designated as C. gloeosporioides in GenBank were not conspecific with the C. gloeosporioides epitype. Therefore, multi-gene loci, which have more informative sites compared with the ribosomal ITS regions, along with morphological analyses, were used to distinguish Colletotrichum species. Recently, Weir et al. systematically described the C. gloeosporioides species complex based on phylogenetic analyses of up to eight genes. They reported 22 species plus one subspecies within the C. gloeosporioides species complex. All taxa accepted within this clade were morphologically similar to the broadly defined C. gloeosporioides, as it has been applied in the literature for the past 50 years. Bernstein et al.
Therefore, it is not sufficient to identify fungal species solely based on morphological features. Penzig (1882) first proposed the name Colletotrichum gloeosporioides based on Vermicularia gloeosporioides, which was collected from citrus in Italy. Von Arx (1957) defined C. gloeosporioides as the anamorph of all fungi with the G. cingulata teleomorph and artificially expanded the spore size range for C. gloeosporioides to address the instability of spore morphology associated with different hosts or cultural conditions. Consequently, numerous Colletotrichum strains characterized by cylindrical conidia from various studies were synonymized with C. gloeosporioides; however, some of these synonymies were later determined to be incorrect. For instance, C. acutatum (Simmonds 1965) and C. boninense (Moriwaki et al. 2003) were reclassified from C. gloeosporioides as defined by von Arx (1957). Additionally, several species previously considered synonyms of C. gloeosporioides sensu von Arx were subsequently identified as members of the C. acutatum or C. boninense species complex.
Cannon et al. (2008) employed a C. gloeosporioides isolate from an Italian orange as an epitype. Living strains and sequence data are accessible from this epitype, enabling comparative DNA sequence analyses of Colletotrichum isolates for accurate species identification, thereby overcoming the limitations inherent in traditional morphological methods. Notably, more than 86% of the ITS sequences from isolates designated as C. gloeosporioides in GenBank were found to be non-specific with respect to the C. gloeosporioides epitype. Consequently, multi-gene loci, which offer a greater number of informative sites compared to the ribosomal ITS regions, alongside morphological analyses, have been utilized to differentiate Colletotrichum species.
Recently, Weir et al. (2012) systematically described the C. gloeosporioides species complex based on phylogenetic analyses involving up to eight genes, reporting 22 species plus one subspecies within this complex. All taxa recognized within this clade exhibit morphological similarities to the broadly defined C. gloeosporioides, as has been documented in the literature over the past five decades. Bernstein et al. (1995) identified C. gloeosporioides and C. acutatum as causal agents of peach anthracnose. Furthermore, a third species, C. truncatum, was reported to cause anthracnose on peach in South Carolina. Anthracnose symptoms were frequently observed on peach fruit cultivated in Aiken, Chesterfield, Saluda, and Spartanburg counties during a disease survey conducted in August 2012. Given that the C. gloeosporioides species complex has not been thoroughly examined for isolates responsible fo
Fungal isolates and culture conditions. Peach fruit showing symptoms of anthracnose disease were collected from commercial peach farms in South Carolina during the summer of 2012. Twenty-eight isolates were collected from different locations in South Carolina, including Chesnee (10 isolates), McBee (10 isolates), Monetta (2 isolates), and Ridge Spring (6 isolates). The locations represent three key production areas in South Carolina: the “Ridge” (Monetta and Ridge Spring), the “Piedmont” (Chesnee), and the “North of Midlands” (McBee). To isolate Colletotrichum spp. from these peaches, fruits were surface-sterilized in 10% bleach for 2 minutes and then rinsed with sterile distilled water. Lesions were cut in half, and necrotic tissue from the inside of the fruit was placed on acidified potato dextrose agar (APDA). Plates were incubated at 22°C with a 12-hour cycle of fluorescent light until sporulating colonies of Colletotrichum spp. had grown. For single-spore isolation, conidia were scraped off the plate using a sterile toothpick and suspended in 1 ml of sterile distilled water. Fifty microliters of the conidial suspension was spread on 1.5% (w/v) water agar plates and incubated at 22°C overnight. One germinated conidium was transferred onto potato dextrose agar (PDA) plates, and plates were incubated at 22°C with a 12-hour cycle of fluorescent light to induce sporulation. Each isolate was stored as dried mycelium on filter paper at −20°C, as previously described. In addition, an isolate of C. acutatum and an isolate of C. truncatum, both from peach, were used to validate the identification method developed in this study.
DNA extractions. Isolates selected for phylogenetic analysis were grown on PDA at 25°C for 4 days in the dark. Single agar plugs containing actively growing mycelium were taken from the periphery of the advancing colonies and transferred to 250-ml flasks containing 40 ml of potato dextrose broth (PDB). Flasks were shaken at 110 rpm for 4 days at 25°C. Developing mycelium was removed from the broth, rinsed under sterile deionized water, and genomic DNA was subsequently extracted using the DNeasy Plant Mini Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
PCR amplification and sequencing. Gene nuclear sequences were obtained from the calmodulin (CAL), glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), and β-tubulin (TUB2) genes. The CAL gene region was amplified from genomic DNA with primer pairs CL1C/CL2C. The standard GAPDH and TUB2 primers yielded poor or nonspecific amplification; therefore, new primers were designed. A forward primer (GDF1) was designed for GAPDH amplification, and a reverse primer (TubR1) was designed for TUB2 amplification based on the C. graminicola M1.001 genome sequence and the TUB2 sequence of a C. gloeosporioides isolate from GenBank, respectively. All amplifications were performed using the T100 Bio-Rad thermal cycler in a total volume of 25 ml. The PCR mixtures contained 1 × PCR buffer, 20 ng template DNA, 0.6 mM of each primer, 200 mM of each dNTP, and 1 unit of Taq DNA polymerase. The amplification parameters for the CAL gene consisted of an initial denaturation at 94°C for 3 min
PCR products were removed using ExoSAP-IT reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Sequencing was conducted at Clemson University Genomics Institute (CUGI, Clemson, SC). Phylogenetic analysis was conducted to characterize and identify Colletotrichum species of peach. Weir et al. (2012) determined that C. siamense and C. fructicola are separate species. We performed an analysis for a combined data matrix of the three coding loci (CAL, GAPDH, and TUB2). Multiple sequence alignments were conducted using DNASTAR (DNASTAR Inc., Nevada City, CA) and CLUSTALX v. 2.1 (Larkin et al. 2007; Thompson et al. 1997). CAL, GAPDH, and TUB2 nucleotide sequences of Colletotrichum species within the Musae clade (Weir et al. 2012) were obtained from GenBank as reference sequences, including those for C. siamense, C. fructicola, C. aenigma, C. aeschynomenes, C. alienum, C. asianum, C. gloeosporioides, C. musae, C. nupharicola, C. queenslandicum, C. salsolae, and C. tropicale. Maximum parsimony (MP) and maximum likelihood (ML) methods were used to carry out phylogenetic reconstruction respectively, using MEGA version 6.0 (Tamura et al. 2013). The MP tree was inferred using the subtree-pruning-regrafting (SPR) search option and 1,000 random sequence additions (level = 1). For the ML tree, the following settings were used: the Tamura 3-parameter model, gamma distributed (5 categories), and heuristic method using SPR-extensive. The bootstrap consensus tree inferred from 1,000 replicates was used to represent the evolutionary history of the taxa analyzed (Felsenstein 1985).
Starter cultures were prepared by plating each isolate onto PDA at 25°C. Five-millimeter-diameter plugs were aseptically removed from the periphery of actively growing, 4-day-old cultures using a sterile cork borer. Each plug was placed onto a petri dish (90 mm diameter) filled with 20 ml of PDA and grown at 25°C in the dark. Three replicate cultures of each isolate were investigated. The colony diameter was measured daily for at least 5 days, and the growth rate was calculated in millimeters per day. After 6 days of incubation, conidia were harvested in 200 ml of sterile water. The length and width of at least 20 conidia from each isolate were measured with a stage micrometer using an OLYMPUS BX41TF microscope (Olympus Optical Co., LTD., Japan) at 400× magnification. For appressorial formation, two drops of a conidial suspension (20 ml; 10^5 conidia/ml) were placed on a microscope slide and then placed inside petri dishes containing moist filter paper. The slides were incubated at 25°C
Appressoria were formed from germ tubes, and their sizes and shapes were measured as described above. Mean and standard deviation values were calculated for mycelial growth rate, the size of conidia, and appressoria.
For the pathogenicity assay on detached fruit, ripe but still firm peach fruit were washed with soap and water, surface sterilized for 2 minutes in 10% bleach, and rinsed with sterile distilled water. Wetted paper towels were placed on the bottom of a carbon fiber tray containing 18 perforated pockets. Fruit were arranged in a randomized block design on 4 cm i.d. plastic rings located in the pockets of the tray and air-dried overnight. For inoculation, a 10-ml droplet of conidial suspension prepared in sterile distilled water (1 to 2 × 10^4 spores/ml) was placed at three equidistant points, each about 2 cm apart, on each peach fruit. Control fruit received sterile water without conidia. The trays were covered with domes and wrapped in a clear plastic bag for 2 days to maintain high humidity, and then incubated at room temperature for 6 days. Disease incidence (DI) was expressed as the percentage of infected spots compared with the total number of spots inoculated. Lesion diameters (LDs) were measured with a ruler. Three isolates of each species were used for inoculation, and six fruit were used for each isolate. The experiment was performed twice. Bartlett’s test for equal variances was conducted to determine whether the LD data from the two independent experiments could be combined. T-tests and Fisher’s exact tests were used to assess whether the LD and DI of the two species were statistically different from each other, respectively. Analysis of variance and significant difference procedures were conducted using JMP Pro 10.0.0 software.
A two-step PCR assay was developed to distinguish among Colletotrichum species from peach. In the first PCR, five primers were combined to amplify fragments from both CAL and GAPDH genes. The primer pair GDF1/C-GAPDH-R amplified a fragment from GAPDH from each of the four species as a positive control. The primer pair CALF1/Cg-R amplified a fragment of CAL only from the C. gloeosporioides species complex, and the primer pair CALF1/Ca-R1 amplified a fragment of CAL only from C. acutatum. The second PCR distinguished the two species in the C. gloeosporioides species complex. This PCR cocktail contained four primers, including the primer pair G3F1/C-GAPDH-R that amplified a GAPDH gene fragment from both species as a positive control. The primer pair CL1C/CALR1 amplified a fragment from the CAL gene from C. fructicola isolates but not from C. siamense isolates. GAPDH gene primers for species delineation were designed based on the aligned sequences from the C. gloeosporioides species complex (C. siamense and C. fructicola) isolates, C. acutatum, and C. truncatum. CAL gene primers were designed based on the aligned sequences from C. siamens
This study examined several isolates, including KJ769236, KJ769246, KM245086, KJ769087, KJ769245, KJ769242, KJ769235, KJ769244, KM245088, KJ769241, KM245090, KJ769243, KM245091, and various ICMP strains. The phylogenetic analysis utilized the combined sequences of the CAL, GAPDH, and TUB2 genes from the 28 isolates and reference strains, encompassing 1,664 nucleotide positions in the dataset. The maximum parsimony (MP) phylogenetic tree revealed that the 28 isolates from South Carolina clustered into two major groups with high bootstrap support (99%). The isolates coded OD12, EY12, and RR12-2, RR12-4, and RR12-6 formed a clade with reference strains of C. siamense (ICMP 17795, ICMP 18121, and ICMP 18642), closely related to a clade formed by reference isolates of C. aeschynomenes and C. tropicale. Meanwhile, isolates coded SE12, RR12-1, and RR12-5 clustered with reference strains of C. fructicola (ICMP 18646 and ICMP 18727), while isolate RR12-3 clustered with another reference strain, ICMP 18645. The maximum likelihood (ML) analysis produced a topological structure similar to the MP analysis.
Distinct colony morphology on PDA medium was observed in C. siamense and C. fructicola after six days of incubation. Colonies of C. siamense varied in color from white or gray to pale brown, featuring dense whitish-gray aerial mycelium with a few bright orange conidial masses near the center. In contrast, colonies of C. fructicola were initially white or gray, later darkening to green with dense pale gray aerial mycelium. The mean colony growth rate on PDA medium for C. siamense was 12.9 ± 1.9 mm per day (ranging from 9.7 to 17 mm), while C. fructicola had a mean growth rate of 13.1 ± 1.7 mm per day (ranging from 9.8 to 16.5 mm).
Regarding conidia and appressoria, there was minimal difference between C. siamense and C. fructicola isolates concerning size and shape. Both species exhibited cylindrical conidia with obtuse to rounded ends.
The mean length and width of conidia was 16.0 ± 2.1 × 4.9 ± 0.2 mm, ranging from 8.4 to 20.5 × 4.8 to 6.0 mm for C. siamense, whereas the mean length and width was 16.8 ± 3.3 × 5.0 ± 0.5 mm, ranging from 8.4 to 26.5 × 4.8 to 6.0 mm for C. fructicola. Appressorial shapes produced by C. siamense were ovate, while the shape varied from clavate to ovate in C. fructicola isolates. The average appressorial size of C. fructicola isolates was larger than that for C. siamense isolates. The mean length and width of appressoria was 7.3 ± 1.0 × 4.8 ± 0.8 mm, ranging from 5.1 to 9.6 × 3.1 to 6.7 mm for C. siamense, whereas the mean length and width was 8.2 ± 1.1 × 5.1 ± 0.6 mm, ranging from 6.0 to 10.8 × 3.6 to 6.0 mm for C. fructicola.
Both C. siamense and C. fructicola tested were pathogenic and sporulated on peach fruit. Koch’s postulates were fulfilled by reisolating the fungus from symptomatic fruit and reidentifying the pathogen to the species level. LD data of each isolate from the two independent experiments was merged because variances between experiments were equal. The average LD of C. fructicola isolates was significantly larger than that of C. siamense isolates. The mean LD for C. fructicola was 1.57 ± 0.34 cm, ranging from 0.60 to 2.15 cm, whereas the mean LD for C. siamense was 1.40 ± 0.30 cm, ranging from 0.70 to 1.85 cm. There was no significant difference between the DI values of C. siamense and C. fructicola isolates. The average DI value of C. siamense isolates was 92.6%, ranging from 91.7 to 94.4%, whereas the average value for C. fructicola isolates was 95.4%, ranging from 88.9 to 100%. C. siamense and C. fructicola isolates produced largely identical symptoms, except that the lesions on fruit inoculated with C. siamense developed a denser, whiter mycelium than those of C. fructicola isolates.
A two-step multiplex PCR method was developed to different
Maximum likelihood (ML) tree inferred from the dataset containing the combined DNA sequences of CAL, GAPDH, and TUB2. The tree with the highest log likelihood (–3,934.3901) is shown. The percentage of replicate trees in which the associated taxa clustered together in the bootstrap test (1,000 replicates) are indicated next to the branches. Initial tree(s) for the heuristic search were obtained automatically by applying the neighbor-join and BioNJ method. A discrete gamma distribution was used to model evolutionary rate differences among sites (five categories (+G, parameter = 0.1303)). There were a total of 1,664 positions in the final dataset. The micromorphological characteristics are typical of C. gloeosporioides according to von Arx (1970) and Sutton (1992). However, previous identification methods relied solely on morphology, which cannot unequivocally place an isolate in this species complex. For example, species within the C. gloeosporioides species complex (Cannon et al. 2012; Weir et al. 2012) are micromorphologically similar to C. cliviae (Yang et al. 2009) and members of the C. boninense species complex (Damm et al. 2012b). Weir et al. (2012) defined the limits of the Colletotrichum species complex genetically based on up to eight gene sequences, delineating 22 species within the complex that formed a strongly supported clade based on ITS sequences (Cannon et al. 2012). This clearly indicated 22 species plus one subspecies within the C. gloeosporioides species complex. However, further analyses determined that not all eight gene sequences are necessary to reliably distinguish Colletotrichum species; GAPDH and TUB2 gene sequences reliably distinguished species for most taxa within this complex (Weir et al. 2012). Additionally, CAL gene sequences distinguished between C. siamense and C. fructicola more effectively than the sequences of ITS, GAPDH, TUB2 (β-tubulin 2), ACT (actin), CHS-1 (chitin synthase), GS (glutamine synthetase), or SOD (manganese superoxide dismutase) (Weir et al. 2012). In this study, the combined sequence data of GAPDH, TUB2, and CAL clearly identified C. gloeosporioides isolates from South Carolina as either C. siamense or C. fructicola when compared with available sequences. This marks the first isolation of C. siamense and C. fructicola from peach. Both species were originally isolated from coffee berries in northern Thailand (Prihastuti et al. 2009).
The characteristics of single spore isolates of Colletotrichum species grown on potato dextrose agar medium at 25°C in darkness for 6 days showed distinct colony appearances. Colonies of C. siamense (isolate
Average = 13.1 ± 1.7, 8.4 to 26.5 × 4.8 to 6.0, 6.0 to 10.8 × 3.6 to 6.0, n = 20
Average = 16.8 ± 3.3 × 5.0 ± 0.5
Average = 8.2 ± 1.1 × 5.1 ± 0.6, n = 90, n = 24
According to Weir et al. (2012), these two species are biologically and geographically diverse. In addition to infecting Coffea, C. siamense has been found on many hosts, including Persea americana, Pistacia vera, Hymenocallis americana, Dioscorea rotundata, Carica papaya, Capsicum annuum, Vitis vinifera, Fragaria × ananassa, Malus domestica, and Jasminium sambac. In contrast, C. fructicola was isolated from Pyrus pyrifolia, Limonium, Malus domestica, Fragaria × ananassa, Persea americana, Ficus, Dioscorea, Theobroma, and Tetragastris (Weir et al. 2012). Both C. siamense and C. fructicola have been isolated from strawberry, and C. siamense has been found on blueberry in the southeastern United States. These findings, along with this study, support their role as fruit pathogens in the southeast (Hu et al. 2015).
Nucleotide sequences from the genes CAL, GAPDH, and TUB2 in C. siamense isolates showed variability, but phylogenetic analysis revealed that all isolates from our collection clustered around C. siamense reference isolates ICMP 17795, ICMP 18642, and ICMP 18121. The observed genetic variability may partly be explained by the geographic isolation of some distinct genotypes (e.g., OD isolates were collected 160 km apart from other isolates). Rojas
C. fructicola colonies had dark gray centers and white peripheral mycelium. Moreover, the differences in conidia size between our C. siamense and C. fructicola isolates were consistent with the variation of conidia size for C. siamense and C. fructicola (Weir et al. 2012). For example, the conidial size variation of these two species was similar within the C. gloeosporioides species complex. The mean length of C. siamense conidia was slightly shorter than that of C. fructicola, whereas the mean width of C. siamense conidia was nearly identical to that of C. fructicola (Weir et al. 2012). In addition, the colony growth rate and appressorial size of C. fructicola were higher and larger, respectively, compared with those of C. siamense when grown on PDA at 28°C in the dark, which was consistent with previously published data (Prihastuti et al. 2009). However, there were differences in the size of conidia and appressoria between the studies. For example, the mean conidia length of our C. siamense isolates was 16.0 µm, whereas Prihastuti et al. (2009) reported a mean length of 10.17 µm. This may be a result of different cultural conditions or because isolates were from different hosts. Yang et al. (2009) used the same C. siamense isolates from the Prihastuti et al. (2009) study and determined conidial length to be 15.3 µm. Four Colletotrichum species are now known to cause anthracnose fruit rot of peach in South Carolina. They are C. siamense, C. fructicola (both described in this study), C. acutatum, and C. truncatum (Grabke et al. 2014; Schnabel et al. 2006). The prevalence of anthracnose fruit rot is still very low in South Carolina according to a survey conducted at recent production meetings in Gaffney and Edgefield, SC. Previous studies have shown that C. acutatum and species within the C. gloeosporioides species complex are the most common species and can easily be confused based on morphological parameters (Damm et al. 2012a; Simmonds 1965). Therefore, a new PCR-based method was developed in this study to differentiate Colletotrichum spp. infecting peach. The method is based on a two-step PCR assay that distinguished the four species and included an internal PCR control in both steps to verify suitable PCR amplification material and conditions. The Colletotrichum isolates included in this study were successfully identified as C. siamense, C. fructicola, or C. acutatum using our new PCR-based assay. Additional C. acutatum isolates in our collection that were characterized in a previous study (Schnabel et al. 2006) were also accurately identified (data not shown). We do not know the composition of species within the C. gloeosporioides complex from other peach production areas; therefore, this PCR assay may have to be validated with isolates from other geographic areas. Also, this identification method may not be applicable to distinguish C. gloeosporioides and C. acutatum isolates from other hosts on a species level since both species represent complexes that include more than 20 di
C. acutatum strains were more resistant to benzimidazole (also known as MBC) fungicides. The relative growth of C. acutatum isolates ranged between 17% and 47% on the discriminatory dose of 2 mg/ml benomyl, whereas none of the C. gloeosporioides isolates from peach grew at that dose. MBC fungicides were more commonly used at and prior to the Bernstein study for the control of different fruit diseases compared with recent years, which may have given C. acutatum a selective advantage. However, MBC fungicides have gradually been replaced by new site-specific fungicides for disease management over the past two to three decades due to concerns about benzimidazole resistance in the major target pathogen, Monilinia fructicola (Zehr et al. 1991).
In conclusion, this study establishes the existence of two species within the C. gloeosporioides species complex that cause anthracnose fruit rot of peach in South Carolina, as documented by pathogenicity studies. Together with C. acutatum and C. truncatum, a total of four species are now known to cause peach anthracnose in the southeast. A molecular assay designed based on GAPDH and CAL nucleotide sequence data was developed and used successfully to distinguish the four species.
The multiplex PCR results for Colletotrichum species from peach indicated that the GeneRuler 100 bp DNA ladder (Thermo Scientific) is shown in lane M. In the first PCR, the primer pair GDF1/C GAPDH-R produced a 359-bp fragment (lanes 1 to 6) from all four species. The forward primer CALF1 and reverse primers Cg-R and Ca-R1 produced amplicons of 649 bp (lanes 1 to 4) or 491 bp (lane 5) in length from the C. gloeosporioides species complex (C. siamense and C. fructicola) or C. acutatum, respectively. In the second PCR, the primer pair G3F1/C GAPDH-R produced a 280-bp fragment (lanes 1 to 4) from both C. siamense and C. fructicola. Primers CL1C and CALR1 produced a 550-bp fragment from C. fructicola (lanes 3 and 4) but not from C. siamense (lanes 1 and 2).
Acknowledgments: Technical Contribution No. 6350 of the Clemson University Experiment Station. This material is based upon work supported by NIFA/USDA, under project number SC-1700501 and SC Dept. of Agriculture Specialty Crop Block Grant Program.
Literature Cited: Adaskaveg, J. E., and Hartin, R. J. 1997. Characterization of Colletotrichum acutatum isolates causing anthracnose of almond and peach in California. Phytopathology 87:979-987. Alahakoon, P. W., and Brown, A. E. 1994. Host-range of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides on tropical fruit crops in Sri Lanka. Int. J. Pest Manage. 40:23-26. Bernstein, B., Zehr, E. I., Dean, R. A., and Shabi, E. 1995. Characteristics of Colletotrichum from peach,
Freeman, S., Shalev, Z., and Katan, J. (2002). Survival in soil of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. gloeosporioides pathogenic on strawberry. Plant Dis. 86:965-970. Gamagae, S. U., Sivakumar, D., Wijeratnam, R. S. W., and Wijesundera, R. L. C. (2003). Use of sodium bicarbonate and Candida oleophila to control anthracnose in papaya during storage. Crop Prot. 22:775-779. Grabke, A., Williamson, M., Henderson, G. W., and Schnabel, G. (2014). First report of anthracnose on peach fruit caused by Colletotrichum truncatum in South Carolina. Plant Dis. 98:1154. Hartung, J. S., Burton, C. L., and Ramsdell, D. C. (1981). Epidemiological studies of blueberry anthracnose disease caused by Colletotrichum gloeosporioides. Phytopathology 71:449-453. Hu, M. J., Grabke, A., Dowling, M. E., Holstein, H. J., and Schnabel, G. (2015). Resistance in Colletotrichum siamense from peach and blueberry to thiophanate-methyl and azoxystrobin. Plant Dis. 99:806-814. Hyde, K. D., Cai, L., Cannon, P. F., Crouch, J. A., Crous, P. W., Damm, U., Goodwin, P. H., Chen, H., Johnston, P. R., Jones, E. B. G., Liu, Z. Y., McKenzie, E. H. C., Moriwaki, J., Noireung, P., Pennycook, S. R., Pfenning, L. H., Prihastuti, H., Sato, T., Shivas, R. G., Tan, Y. P., Taylor, P. W. J., Weir, B. S., Yang, Y. L., and Zhang, J. Z. (2009a). Colletotrichum names in current use. Fungal Divers. 39:147-183. Hyde, K. D., Cai, L., McKenzie, E. H. C., Yang, Y. L., Zhang, J. Z., and Prihastuti, H. (2009b). Colletotrichum: a catalogue of confusion. Fungal Divers. 39:1-17. Kim, W. G., and Hong, S. K. (2008). Occurrence of anthracnose on peach tree caused by Colletotrichum species. Plant Pathol. J. 24:80-83. Larkin, M. A., Blackshields, G., Brown, N. P., Chenna, R., McGettigan, P. A., McWilliam, H., Valentin, F., Wallace, I. M., Wilm, A., Lopez, R., Thompson, J. D., Gibson, T. J., and Higgins, D. G. (2007). Clustal W and Clustal X version 2.0. *Bioinformatic
Shi, Y., Correll, J. C., Guerber, J. C., and Rom, C. R. 1996. Frequency of Colletotrichum species causing bitter rot of apple in the southeastern United States. Plant Dis. 80:692-696. Simmonds, J. H. 1965. A study of the species of Colletotrichum causing ripe fruit rots in Queensland. Queensl. J. Agr. Anim. Sci. 22:437-459. Smith, B. J., and Black, L. L. 1990. Morphological, cultural and pathogenic variation among Colletotrichum species isolated from strawberry. Plant Dis. 74:69-76. Smith, B. J., Magee, J. B., and Gupton, C. L. 1996. Susceptibility of rabbiteye blueberry cultivars to postharvest diseases. Plant Dis. 80:215-218. Stanley, F., Talma, K., and Ezra, S. 1996. Characterization of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides isolates from avocado and almond fruits with molecular and pathogenicity tests. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 62:1014-1020. Sutton, B. C. 1992. The genus Glomerella and its anamorph Colletotrichum. Pages 1-26 in: Colletotrichum Biology, Pathology and Control. CAB International, Wallingford, UK. Tamura, K., Stecher, G., Peterson, D., Filipski, A., and Kumar, S. 2013. MEGA6: Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis version 6.0. Mol. Biol. Evol. 30: 2725-2729. Templeton, M. D., Rikkerink, E. H. A., Solon, S. L., and Crowhurst, R. N. 1992. Cloning and molecular characterization of the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase-encoding gene and cDNA from the plant pathogenic fungus Glomerella cingulata. Gene 122:225-230. Thompson, J. D., Gibson, T. J., Plewniak, F., Jeanmougin, F., and Higgins, D. G. 1997. The CLUSTAL_X windows interface: flexible strategies for multiple sequence alignment aided by quality analysis tools. Nucleic Acids Res. 25:4876-4882. von Arx, J. A. 1957. Die Arten der Gattung Colletotrichum Cda. Phytopathol. Z. 29:413-468. von Arx, J. A. 1970. A revision of the fungi classified as Gloeosporium. Bibl. Mycol. Res. 24:1-203. Weir, B. S., Johnston, P. R., and Damm, U. 2012. The Colletotrichum gloeosporioides species complex. Stud. Mycol. 73:115-180. Yang, Y. L., Liu, Z.
