Development of a model for Colletotrichum diseases with calibration for phylogenetic clades on different host plants
Fungi in the genus Colletotrichum cause serious pre- and post-harvest losses to several agricultural crops worldwide. Through a systematic literature review, we retrieved published information on Colletotrichum anthracnose diseases affecting different host plants and developed a mechanistic model incorporating the main stages of the pathogen’s life cycle and the effect of weather. The model predicts anthracnose progress during the growing season on the aerial organs of various crops and was parameterized for seven Colletotrichum clades (acutatum, dematium, destructivum, gloeosporioides, graminicola, and orbiculare) as well as the singleton species, C. coccodes. The model was evaluated for anthracnose diseases caused by fungi belonging to five clades on six hosts, using data from 17 epidemics that occurred in Italy, the USA, Canada, and Japan. A comparison of observed versus predicted data showed a concordance correlation coefficient of 0.928 and an average distance between real data and the fitted line of 0.044. After further validation, the model could be used to support decision-making for crop protection.
KEYWORDS: epidemiology, disease modeling, glomerella, systematic literature review, model validation
1 Introduction
Fungi in the genus Colletotrichum (phylum: Ascomycota, class: Sordariomycetes) cause pre- and post-harvest diseases in horticultural, ornamental, and fruit tree crops worldwide. The genus Colletotrichum has been ranked among the top 10 fungal plant pathogens in terms of scientific and economic importance.
This genus is widely distributed in tropical and subtropical regions as well as in temperate and Mediterranean areas. Common hosts range from high-value crops like strawberry, olive, apple, and grape to staple food crops grown by subsistence farmers in developing countries, such as sorghum and cassava. Many Colletotrichum species are primarily reported as causal agents of anthracnose, which is also known by other names, like bitter rot on apple and ripe rot on grape. In addition to causing severe yield losses, anthracnose epidemics can reduce the quality of the produce. Blossom blight and fruit rots are often the main economically damaging symptoms; however, necrotic lesions can also appear on leaves, stems, and twigs, leading to the deterioration of plants and a reduction in fruit quality.
Colletotrichum species are grouped into phylogenetic clades (also called “species complexes”) based on multilocus molecular analysis. Species within a clade are closely related to each other and have similar temperature requirements. A recent systematic review of the taxonomy and phylogenetic clades of the genus identified 15 major clades and a number of small clusters and isolated species. Detailed descriptions of major phylogenetic clades and the list of species in each clade were provided by several researchers.
Colletotrichum species are primarily reported as causal agents of anthracnose, occurring on plant leaves, stems, flowers, and fruits. The disease cycles of anthracnose on different hosts have similar components; they are generally polycyclic, with splash-borne asexual spores (conidia) responsible for the initiation and spread of the epidemics. Other Colletotrichum diseases have been described, causing crown rot of strawberry and black dot on tomato and potato roots. Colletotrichum species can also cause post-harvest diseases, especially on avocado, almond, and citrus fruit; in these cases, the pathogens develop infection structures (appressoria) on the host but remain dormant inside the fruit until after harvest, at which time symptoms develop. Several studies have reported that species within a clade show similar colonization and infection behavior, while the establishment of quiescence is host- and tissue-specific.
Species within clades have similar temperature requirements for mycelial growth, conidial germination, infection, and spore production. For example, C. gloeosporioides, C. fragarie, C. gossypii, and C. musae, which belong to the gloeosporioides clade, show optimal temperatures for mycelial growth, sporulation, conidial germination, and infection between 25 and 32°C. Integrated pest management (IPM) against Colletotrichum spp. includes cultural, biological, and chemical control. Cultural control involves producing disease-free propagating materials, avoiding overhead irrigation, limiting rain splashing through mulching, and managing weeds. The removal of infected crop residues and mummified or rotten fruits is recommended to reduce inoculum sources and disease pressure in the field. For instance, removing crop debris reduced anthracnose severity by about 30% in Ethiopian sorghum fields. The use of resistant cultivars could be an environmentally friendly and cost-effective way to control the disease; however, available marketable cultivars often do not provide enough resistance to eliminate the need for fungicides. Biological control agents (BCAs), such as Trichoderma spp. and Bacillus subtilis, have been considered, but most farmers still prefer combining cultural practices and chemical control methods due to the variable efficacy of BCAs under field conditions. Calendar-based chemical applications remain the main tool for controlling anthracnose diseases, leading to intensive fungicide sprays that may involve unnecessary applications, which are not economically or ecologically sustainable. Mathematical models can help growers schedule fungicide sprays. Models have been developed to understand the epidemiology of anthracnose on specific crops and support infection-risk-based fungicide applications. Most of these models, however, are simple and consider only one component of the pathogen life cycle, mainly conidial infection, focusing on a single Colletotrichum species or crop. Furthermore, many of these models have never been validated against independent data. In contrast, mechanistic models have a flexible structure, high explanatory ability, and the capability to make predictions across various agricultural contexts; as a result, they are considered useful for decision-making in IPM. Recently, a mechanistic, weather-driven model for the ripe rot of grapes caused by Colletotrichum species was developed and validated.
Given that the pathogens causing different Colletotrichum diseases affecting the aerial parts of host plants in the field (pre-harvest) have similar life cycles, we developed a general, weather-driven, mechanistic model for anthracnose epidemics. The model is “general” in that it has one conceptual structure that incorporates the key epidemiological components and a set of equations that account for the effect of external variables (both environmental and host-related), which can be calibrated for single Colletotrichum species, clades, and host plants. For model development and calibration, we (i) conducted a systematic literature search to retrieve the available information on Colletotrichum anthracnose diseases; (ii) used this information to develop a conceptual model of the diseases caused by Colletotrichum species based on systems analysis; (iii) developed the mathematical equations describing the system both quantitatively and dynamically; (iv) calibrated the model for seven major clades and the singleton species C. coccodes (referred to as the coccodes clade in this report); and finally (v) evaluated the ability of the model to represent the real system.
Materials and Methods
Literature Search
For developing the conceptual and mathematical structure of the model, we conducted a systematic literature search to collect data on the biology, ecology, and epidemiology of Colletotrichum spp. from academic articles, articles in the press, and conference papers. Articles were searched by combining the following keywords: (i) Colletotrichum; (ii) conidia OR spore OR acervuli OR primary inoculum OR production OR development OR overwinter OR dissemination OR release OR dispersion OR deposition OR infection OR penetration OR germination OR incubation OR lesion development OR lesion onset OR latency OR latent period, and (iii) temperature OR wetness OR relative humidity OR rain OR environment. The literature search was carried out in 2022 in three bibliographical databases: Scopus, Web of Science, and CAB Abstracts. Each article found was first reviewed based on the information in the title and abstract; articles of potential interest were then read in full. Additional articles were retrieved from the “References” section of the found articles; these articles were also reviewed. Selected papers were used to extract information on the influence of environmental conditions on the considered biological processes. Data on the pathogen or the disease were obtained directly from the text, tables, or graphs in the papers; specific data from graphs were obtained using a graph digitizer.
Conceptualization of the System
Although different lifestyles have been described for Colletotrichum spp. (i.e., necrotrophic, biotrophic, hemibiotrophic, quiescent, and endophytic lifestyles), the life cycles of these species share some common attributes, which include both sexual and asexual reproduction. Because the perithecial stage is
Colletotrichum spp. overwinter as mycelium or sclerotia in crop debris, fruit mummies, and buds. In some hosts, such as strawberry and Citrus spp., the pathogen survives as melanized appressoria on asymptomatic leaves. The pathogen can also be introduced into the field with infected seeds or transplants; however, infected seeds and transplants are not considered primary inoculum sources in our model, as we assume that farmers use pathogen-free propagating material. Primary inoculum consists of fresh conidia produced in acervuli under favorable conditions of temperature (10 to 30°C for most clades) and moisture (e.g., wetness periods longer than 6 hours) on overwintered sources for the entire cropping season. Conidia are splash-dispersed by rain, deposited on plant surfaces, and germinate; the germ tubes then produce appressoria that, in turn, produce infection pegs that penetrate the host cuticle and epidermal cell walls. Penetration through stomata or wounds by germ tubes without the formation of appressoria is rare. The infection of epidermal and mesophyll cells occurs after a symptomless biotrophic phase and results in a necrotic phase in which host cells are killed and secondary hyphae grow intra- and inter-cellularly. In some cases, the pathogen has a quiescent phase, and the switch to the necrotrophic phase occurs only when host tissue and environmental conditions become conducive to the continuation of the infection cycle. Except for a few species that exist entirely as endophytes, the majority of Colletotrichum species develop a necrotrophic stage at some point in their life cycle. Acervuli finally develop within lesions and produce masses of conidia that serve as secondary inoculum for the repetition of infection cycles and the further spread of the disease.
Information from the literature was organized in a relational diagram representing the epidemic structure as developed by Zadoks and using the systems analysis syntax. In this structure, the crop is composed of a large but finite number of sites that have equal dimensions and equal probability of becoming infected; a site is defined as a fraction of the host tissues where an infection may occur and where a lesion may develop. During the epidemic, a site goes through the following stages: healthy, infected without visible lesions (latent infection), infected with visible lesions (i.e., disease symptoms or signs), infected with fertile (i.e., sporulating) lesions, and finally, infected with no-longer sporulating lesions (or removed lesions). In the model, the site stages are state variables; the flow from one stage to the next is regulated by rates, which are influenced by external and auxiliary variables. The external variables include weather variables such as air temperature, wetness duration, and rainfall.
Mathematical equations link the external frontiers.
TABLE 1 lists the variables, rates, and parameters used in the model, along with their units. The state variables include:
The rate variables consist of:
Parameters include:
Auxiliary variables are:
Computed variables include:
External variables include:
The variables were developed using data extracted from the literature; different parameterization was employed for the different phylogenetic clades of *Collet
Driving functions:
Notes: a) The range 0 to 1 refers to a dimensionless, continuous variable. b) The range 0/1 refers to a dimensionless, binomial variable (i.e., 0 = the host is not susceptible to infection; 1 = the host is susceptible to infection).
FIGURE 1: The general life cycle of Colletotrichum spp. as considered in the model shows that the pathogen overwinters as mycelia or sclerotia in various plant residues, which produce acervuli that in turn generate primary conidia. Infections initiated by rain-dispersed conidia develop into lesions, which subsequently form acervuli that produce conidia for secondary infection cycles.
The model's parameters were compared based on the Akaike’s Information Criterion (AIC); the model providing the smallest AIC value was considered the most accurate (Brunham and Anderson, 2002). Equation parameters were estimated using the function nls from the “stats” package of R software. For parameter estimation, data obtained from different experiments were treated as replicates; data concerning various species within the same clade were also considered replicates. The goodness-of-fit of equations to original (rescaled) data was evaluated using adjusted R², the concordance correlation coefficient (CCC), the root mean square error (RMSE), and the coefficient of residual mass (CRM). The adjusted R² was calculated by conducting a linear regression between observed values and model-predicted values using the lm function of the R “stats” package. CCC indicates the difference between the best-fitting line and the perfect agreement line (with CCC = 1 indicating perfect agreement). CCC was computed using the CCC function from the R “DescTools” package. RMSE, representing the average distance of actual data from the fitted line, was obtained using the rmse function from the R “modeler” package. CRM was calculated according to the methods described in Manstretta and Rossi; it measures the tendency of the model to overestimate or underestimate observed values (with a negative CRM indicating overestimation). The model was developed and run in Excel® (Microsoft 365®).
Model evaluation: We assessed the model's ability to describe real epidemics using 17 disease progress curves obtained from field data and literature. Details on Colletotrichum species and clades, primary inoculum
In the validation, we assumed that each epidemic is triggered by a potential quantity of inoculum sources (represented by the parameter k in equation [1]), which are responsible for the production of primary conidia. The values of k used to initialize the model were estimated empirically, as there was no information in the literature for an exact calculation of this parameter for each epidemic. We selected the value of k that resulted in the closest agreement between predicted and observed disease severities by running the model with varying values of k (in the range of 0 to 1). For epidemics resulting from natural inoculum, the model was operated starting from January 1. For epidemics triggered by the experimental placement of diseased plants (e.g., epidemics MA-14 and MA-15) or diseased fruit (e.g., epidemics OH-90 and OH-91) in or near the crop, the model was operated from the day when the diseased plants or fruit were introduced into the field. In the case of MA-14 and MA-15, the inoculum was introduced by sowing Colletotrichum-infested white bean seeds (along with non-infested seeds), which developed into plants that produced the primary conidia; the model was operated from June 2 for MA-14 and from June 9 for MA-15. For OH-90 and OH-91, the inoculum was provided by Colletotrichum-diseased strawberry fruits that experimenters placed within the crop, with the model operated from July 16 for OH-90 and from August 7 for OH-91. Predicted disease severities (i.e., the sum of visible, infectious, and removed sites) and observed disease severities were compared, and CCC, RMSE, and CRM (Nash and Sutcliffe, 1970; Lin, 1989), which were used to evaluate the goodness-of-fit of predicted versus observed data, were calculated using R software as described before. The different sources of predictive errors in the model were identified by calculating Theil’s partial inequality (Theil’s U statistic) coefficients.
The relational diagram of the processes leading to infection by Colletotrichum spp. outlines the core structure of the model based on Zadoks (1971). This diagram illustrates the evolution of host sites through various states: from healthy (H) to latent (L), visible (V), infectious (I), and finally to removed (R). The model does not incorporate host growth and senescence, nor does it account for lesion expansion. Among the coefficients calculated, Ubias indicates the mean difference between observed and predicted disease, Uslope indicates deviations from the 1:1 line, and Uerror represents unexplained variance.
Sites become infected (i.e., they change from healthy sites into latent sites) at an infection rate (INFR), which depends on the abundance of conidia (CON), which can be both primary (CON’) and secondary (CON”) conidia, and on their rain-dependent dispersal rate (DISR). Primary conidia (produced on k overwintered inoculum sources at a sporulation rate of SPOR’) and secondary conidia (produced on lesions on the host plant at a sporulation rate of SPOR”) accumulate in CON’ and CON”, respectively. SPOR’ depends on temperature and wetness duration, while SPOR” depends only on temperature, as the moisture required for sporulation is provided by the host plant. Infection rate also depends on a correction factor (CF) for diseased sites (i.e., stages L, V, I, and R), a multiplication factor (Rc) representing the proportion of daughter lesions generated per mother lesion, which depends on temperature (RcT) and wetness duration (RcWD). Infection occurs during the period of host susceptibility (HS), which is regulated by the plant growth stage and varies with the host. Latent sites become visible at the end of an incubation period (IP), and visible sites become infectious at the end of a latency period (LP), both of which depend on temperature; the progress of IP and LP depends on an incubation (INCR) and latency (LATR) rate, respectively. Infectious sites produce secondary conidia (CON”) during the infectious period (iP) and finally become removed at a removal rate (REMR). At the beginning of model calculations, H = 1 (i.e., the whole crop is healthy), and the model represents the flow from one state to the following one as a proportion of H, i.e., on a 0 to 1 scale. The model works at hourly time steps.
The model considers that the primary inoculum consists of conidia (CON’) produced by k inoculum sources at a sporulation rate (SPOR’) that depends on temperature and wet periods. On any ith hour, the model calculates SPOR’ as follows:
SPOR₀ = k × f(T) × f’(WD)
where the parameter k (ranging from 0 to 1) represents the abundance of primary inoculum sources; f(T) accounts for the effect of temperature (T, °C) on the production of conidia; f’(WD) accounts for the effect of wetness duration (WD, hours) on the production of conidia, and is calculated as the first derivative of
The effect of temperature is calculated using a BETE equation (Analytis, 1977) in the following form:
f(T)=(a⋅Teqb⋅(1−Teq))
c
where
a to
c are equation parameters, and
Teq is the temperature equivalent defined as
Teq=
(Tmax−Tmin)
(T−Tmin)
. In this equation,
T represents the hourly temperature, while
Tmin and
Tmax are the minimum and maximum temperatures for sporulation, respectively. The values for
Tmin,
Tmax, and equation parameters for each clade were derived from Salotti et al. (2022). When there are three or more continuous hours of wetness, the effect of moisture is calculated as follows (Leandro et al., 2001): if
WD≥3, then
f(WD)=exp(−5.947⋅exp(−0.067⋅WD))
otherwise,
f(WD)=0. Here,
WD refers to leaf wetness duration for host-pathogen combinations where the inoculum source is located in the aerial part of the plant, such as hanging mummies or bud scales, or ground wetness duration when the source is on the ground, like plant debris, leaf litter, or mummies in soil. In the model, the ground is considered wet during hours when rainfall (
P) is greater than 0 mm or the vapor pressure deficit (VPD) is less than or equal to 4.5 hPa; otherwise, it is considered dry (Rossi et al., 2008). VPD is calculated from temperature and relative humidity (RH, in %) following Buck (1981). To calculate
WD, wet hours are accumulated until a dry hour occurs; if wetness is restored within 16 hours,
WD continues to increase until the next dry hour. If the dry period lasts more than 16 hours, the calculation of
WD stops. Equation (3) was developed and parameterized by fitting data from Leandro et al. (2003) and Moral and Trapero (2012), which refer to the acutatum clade. Estimates and standard errors of the equation parameters were
5.947±1.329 and
0.067±0.009, with adjusted
R
2
=0.910, ( CCC =
where f1(P) accounts for the dispersal of conidia and their deposition on host tissues, and f2(P) accounts for the washing-off of conidia from host tissues due to precipitation intensity > 15 mm h⁻¹. f1(P) is calculated as follows:
f1(P) = exp(–2.5 × exp(–0.15 × P)) (5)
if P > 15, then
f2(P) = 1 / (1 + 966.9 × exp(–0.133 × P)) (6)
otherwise, f2(P) = 0. Equation (5) was developed and parameterized by fitting the data; estimates and standard errors of equation parameters were 2.5 ± 0.84 and 0.15 ± 0.04, with adjusted R² = 0.895, CCC = 0.953, RMSE = 0.099, and CRM = 0.002. Equation (6) was developed and parameterized by fitting the data; estimates and standard errors of equation parameters were 966.9 ± 16.4 and 0.133 ± 0.003, with adjusted R² = 0.999, CCC = 0.999, RMSE = 0.004, and CRM = 0.002.
3.1.3 Infection by conidia
Conidia on the plant surface cause infection according to an infection rate (INFR), which modulates the transfer of sites from healthy to latent. INFR is calculated as follows:
INFR = HS × CON × DISR × Rc × CF (7)
where HS defines whether the host plant is susceptible (HS=1) or not (HS=0); CON is the sum of CON’ and CON”; Rc is a basic infection rate; and CF is a correction factor for diseased sites, calculated as follows:
CF = 1 – (D / (D + H)) (8)
where D is the sum of disease sites (D = L + V + I + R) and H represents healthy sites. The model accounts for changes in the susceptibility of the host to infection by introducing the correction factor HS into equation (7). HS is defined for each host depending on the species and growth stage. For epidemics occurring on green tissues (leaves, stems, etc.), the model assumes that the plants are susceptible from the appearance of the organ to the end of the season (i.e., harvest for herbaceous hosts; leaf fall for trees and bushes). For epidemics occurring on fruits, HS strictly depends on the reproductive growth stage of the host. For instance, grapevine berries are susceptible from fruit set to harvest, and olive drupes are susceptible from the beginning of flowering to harvest.
In equation (7), Rc represents the proportion of daughter lesions generated per mother lesion. Following previous research, Rc depends on the optimum corrected basic infection rate (RcOPT), which is the basic infection rate under optimum environmental conditions on a susceptible host, and on modifiers for the effect of temperature (RcT) and wetness duration (RcWD) as follows:
Rc = RcOPT × RcT × RcWD (9)
The value of RcOPT is estimated for each Colletotrichum clade from disease progress curves as follows:
RcOPT = r = (exp(–r × p) – exp(–r × (i + p))) (10)
where p is the latency period under favorable conditions, i is the infectious period under favorable conditions, and r is the apparent infection rate calculated as follows:
r = ln(x2 / x1) / (t2 – t1) (11)
where x1 and x2 are disease fractions on two successive dates
The value of
i was set at 28 days based on King et al. (1997) across all clades. The modifier
RcT accounts for the effect of air temperature on infection and is calculated using a BETE equation (Analytis, 1977) represented in equation (3). The minimum and maximum temperatures for infection by conidia, along with the equation parameters, were derived from Salotti et al. (2022) for each clade. The modifier
RcWD accounts for the effect of leaf wetness duration and is calculated for any
i-th hour as the first derivative of equations (12) to (15), depending on the Colletotrichum clade.
For the acutatum clade, equation (12) was developed and parameterized by fitting the data from Wilson et al. (1990), Turechek et al. (2006), Gillett and Schilder (2009), Bertetti et al. (2009), Diéguez-Uribeondo et al. (2011), Moral et al. (2012), Miles et al. (2013), Greer et al. (2014), Rodriguez-Salamanca et al. (2015), and Gonçalves et al. (2021). For the coccodes clade, the same equation was parameterized using data from Andersen and Walker (1985), Dillard (1989), Byrne et al. (1998), Hong and Hwang (1998), Sanogo et al. (2003), and Rodriguez-Salamanca et al. (2018).
For the acutatum clade, the parameters were
d=5.491±0.232 and
e=0.207±0.042, yielding an adjusted
R
2
=0.894, CCC = 0.949, RMSE = 0.115, and CRM = -0.027. For the coccodes clade, the parameters were
d=7.343±0.696 and
e=0.164±0.028, with adjusted
R
2
=0.956, CCC = 0.979, RMSE = 0.083, and CRM = 0.008. For the dematium clade, equation (13) was parameterized based on Uysal and Kurt (2017), yielding
f(WD)=1−exp(−0.1⋅WD) with the parameter
0.10±0.02, and
R
2
=0.865, CCC = 0.943, RMSE = 0.09, and CRM = -0.004.
For the destructivum clade, equation (14) was developed using data from Chongo and Bernier (2000). The same equation for the gloeosporioides clade was parameterized by fitting the data from Griffin et al. (1987), Chakraborty et al. (1990), Yun and Park (1990), Hildebrand and Jensen (1991), Pandey et al. (1997), Luo and TeBeest (1999), Monteiro et al. (2009), Guyader et al. (2013), Wang et al. (2015), Zhao et al. (2020), and Gonçalves et al. (2021). For the orbiculare clade, the same equation was parameterized using data from Auld et al. (1989), Monroe et al. (1997), and Dalla Pria
No information on the effect of WD on infection was retrieved for the graminicola clade. The model assumes that there is a similarity between the infection pattern of the graminicola and destructivum clades based on the inter-clade variability studies. Therefore, the model calculates RcWD for the graminicola clade by using equation (14) as parameterized for the destructivum clade.
3.1.4 Incubation and Latency Periods
Sites flow from L to V at an incubation rate (INCR), which depends on the incubation period (IP), and then from V to I with a latency rate (LATR), which depends on the latency period (LP). In each ith hour, the model calculates the hourly progress of both IP and LP as a function of temperature by using the equation of Magarey et al. (2005) in the following form:
pi=f(T)=IP
min
Estimates of the optimum corrected basic infection rate (RcOPT) for eight Colletotrichum clades are summarized as follows: the RcOPT values range from 0.1 to 0.5 among the clades, with the acutatum clade having the highest RcOPT at 0.4. The latency period (p) under favorable conditions for epidemics varies, with values ranging from 5 to 14 days. The infectious period (i) is consistently set at 28 days across all clades. Various studies provided the necessary data for these estimates, indicating the source references used to derive the RcOPT, p, and i values.
The equations for the progression of incubation (pi) and latency (pl) are represented as follows:
pl=f(T)=LP
min

where pi and pl represent the progression of incubation and latency, respectively, in any ith hour. The shortest durations of incubation and latency at the optimum temperature are denoted as IPmin and LPmin, while f(T) accounts for the influence of temperature. The function f(T) is defined as:
f(T)=
(Tmax−T)(Tmax−Topt)
(T−Tmin)(Topt−Tmin)
⋅
(Topt−Tmin)
(Tmax−Topt)

where Tmin and Tmax represent the minimal and maximal temperatures for incubation or latency, respectively. When T < Tmin or T > Tmax, f(T) = 0.
Each clade has associated cardinal temperatures, including Tmin, Topt, and Tmax, alongside estimates of IPmin and LPmin at the optimum temperature, with respective standard errors and goodness-of-fit metrics. No information was available for the dematium clade, but between-clade similarities in temperature were used to inform estimates.
The parameters estimated for the acutatum clade, as shown by Salotti et al. (2022), were applied to the dematium clade. The model accumulates the hourly progress of incubation and latency, beginning with the hour when the infection occurs. When the sum of hourly progress results in an infection progress (IP) of ≥1, the indicator for infection (INCR) equals 1, and sites transition from latency (L) to vulnerability (V). When the sum of hourly progress results in a latency progress (LP) of ≥1, the latency indicator (LATR) equals 1, and sites transition from vulnerability (V) to infection (I).
Infectious sites (I) continue producing conidia for an infection period (iP) and subsequently transition from I to removal (R) according to a removal rate (REMR). The model assumes that fertile lesions produce conidia throughout the entire epidemic, meaning that REMR equals 0. The I sites generate secondary conidia at a sporulation rate (SPOR”) that depends on temperature according to a specific equation. These secondary conidia accumulate in a reservoir (CON”). Based on King et al. (1997), the model assumes the pathogen obtains sufficient moisture from the host to produce conidia and does not require free surface moisture for sporulation. The contribution of secondary inoculum to the epidemic's progression has been demonstrated for certain host-pathogen combinations (Fitzell and Peak, 1984; Smith, 2008; Everett et al., 2018), but not for others. In olive orchards, for example, mummies serve as the primary inoculum source throughout the season, rendering the contribution of conidia produced within fruit lesions negligible (Moral et al., 2012). When lesions do not contribute to the epidemic's progression, CON” equals 0.
Regarding predicted disease severity, further details may be explored in subsequent sections of the research.
The model calculates disease severity (DS) during the epidemic as the sum of the proportion of sites with disease symptoms, i.e., visible, infectious, and removed sites, as follows: DS = V + I + R.
The model was validated for the acutatum, dematium, gloeosporioides, graminicola, and orbiculare clades. The model’s ability to predict disease development throughout the season was evaluated for 17 epidemics recorded between 1980 and 2019 in Italy, the USA, Canada, and Japan on six hosts: olive, strawberry, mulberry, grape, bluegrass, and dry bean. In this manuscript, only a few epidemics are described in detail; details on the remaining epidemics are provided in the Supplementary material. For the acutatum clade, model validation was performed for four epidemics on drupes recorded in naturally infested olive orchards in Southern Italy, and two epidemics in artificially infested strawberry fields in Ohio, USA; in the latter case, researchers provided the inoculum by placing affected fruit between the strawberry rows. Epidemics on olive developed between August and December, with final disease incidence on drupes ranging from 7% to 26%. The concordance correlation coefficient (CCC) between predicted and observed disease ranged from 0.789 to 0.953, and the root mean square error (RMSE) ranged from 0.022 to 0.047. Epidemics in the two strawberry fields occurred in July to August in OH-90, and from August to September in OH-91, with final disease incidences of 28% and 45%, respectively; in the comparison of predicted and observed disease, CCC was 0.874 and 0.898, and RMSE was 0.055 and 0.061, respectively. Across all six epidemics of the acutatum clade, CCC was 0.895, RMSE was 0.048, and the correlation ratio mean (CRM) was −0.099 (indicating a slight tendency of the model toward overestimation). An example of model output for the acutatum clade is shown for IT-17A. In the olive orchard, flowering (BBCH 61, i.e., the beginning of host susceptibility) began on May 15, and harvest occurred at the end of December. From mid-May to the end of December, the average daily temperature was 20.3°C (min = 4.5°C, max = 31.1°C), with an average relative humidity (RH) of 71%, a total of 365 mm of rain on 69 rainy days, and a total of 1617 hours of leaf wetness. Rains were frequent and intense between September and November, with prolonged wetness peri
During this period, the average daily temperature was 21.9°C (min = 7.0°C, max = 30.1°C), with an average relative humidity (RH) of 82%. There was a total of 625.5 mm of rain over 61 rainy days, and a total of 1688 hours of leaf wetness. Regularly distributed rainfall ensured that the epidemic would progress during the season, starting from the time of disease onset in August until November, when a sharp increase in disease led to a 37% disease incidence. The model correctly predicted this dynamic; across all three epidemics, the concordance correlation coefficient (CCC) was 0.991, root mean square error (RMSE) was 0.02, and correlation ratio mean (CRM) was 0.078. Model validation for the gloeosporioides clade was performed for three epidemics on grapevines in North Carolina, USA. These epidemics developed between June and September, with final disease incidence on berries ranging from 24% to 54%. A small average distance of real data from the fitted line was observed for the three epidemics, with RMSE ranging from 0.012 to 0.101. Concordance between observed and predicted values for NC-80 and NC-82 yielded CCC values of 0.843 and 0.993, respectively. The NC-81 epidemic is reported separately. Berries were susceptible between June 9 (BBCH 71, i.e., fruit set) and October 1 (BBCH 89, i.e., berries ripe for harvest). During this period, the average daily temperature was 24.6°C (min = 14.5°C, max = 29.8°C), with an average RH of 77%. There was a total of 216.1 mm of rain over 31 rainy days, and a total of 746 hours of leaf wetness. Disease incidence was assessed on September 17 and 24, and on October 1, with a final disease incidence of 24%. Contrary to observations, the model anticipated the observed increase in disease by a few days at the end of the season, with CCC equal to 0.497, probably due to an imprecise estimation of the incubation length in relation to the berry growth stage at the time of infection. In the comparison of predicted and observed disease progress curves for the three epidemics of the gloeosporioides clade, CCC was 0.910, RMSE was 0.068, and CRM was −0.109, indicating a slight tendency of the model toward overestimation. Model validation for the graminicola clade was performed for three bluegrass epidemics in New Jersey, USA, in 2009 and 2010, and in Michigan, USA, in 1982. The epidemics were observed between May and August, with final disease severity ranging from 16% to 41%. In the comparison of model output and observed data, CCC ranged from 0.947 to 0.997, RMSE ranged fr
Epidemics considered for model validation include various clades with specific parameters. For the acutatum clades, the overall results show a high correlation coefficient (CCC) above 0.895 and a root mean square error (RMSE) of 0.048. The IT-17A epidemic had a final disease incidence of 0.50 with 5 field observations, yielding a CCC of 0.953 and an RMSE of 0.022. The overall results for the dematium clades indicate a CCC above 0.950 and an RMSE of 0.036. The JA-94 epidemic had a final disease incidence of 0.00004 with 4 observations, resulting in a CCC of 0.991. For the gloeosporioides clades, the overall results reveal a CCC of 0.910 and an RMSE of 0.068, with NC-82 showing a final disease incidence of 0.0002 and a CCC of 0.993. The graminicola clades demonstrated an overall CCC of 0.973 and an RMSE of 0.026, with MI-82 having a CCC of 0.997. The orbiculare clades showed a CCC above 0.931 with an RMSE of 0.027. In summary, the overall results for all 17 clades indicate a CCC of 0.928 and an RMSE of 0.044. Each epidemic is labeled by location and year, along with the final disease incidence or severity, the k value for model parameterization, the number of field observations, and the model performance indicators.
Inoculum was introduced into the field by mid-August. At MA-14, the disease was recorded only in traces (<1%), making proper model evaluation impossible. At MA-15, the average daily temperature was 18.9°C (min = 10.6°C, max = 26.7°C), with an average relative humidity of 75%. There was a total of 202.6 mm of rain over 31 rainy days, and a total of 651 hours of leaf wetness. Regularly distributed rainfall and prolonged wet periods ensured the progressive development of the epidemic from the first third of July until mid-August, resulting in a final disease severity of 20%. The model slightly overestimated disease dynamics in the second half of July, with a concordance correlation coefficient (CCC) of 0.896, root mean square error (RMSE) of 0.035, and a correlation ratio (CRM) of 0.19, indicating a tendency for underestimation. Across both orbiculare clade epidemics, CCC was 0.931, RMSE was 0.027, and CRM was 0.158, also indicating a tendency for underestimation. An overall comparison of predicted versus observed values for the 17 epidemics indicated CCC of 0.928 and RMSE of 0.044. The similarity between the observed data and the fitted line suggested that the model accurately represented the mechanisms leading to Colletotrichum epidemics on various host plants. However, the model showed a slight tendency toward overestimation (CRM = −0.052) when evaluated for epidemics on different host plants. The variance explained by the relationship of observed versus predicted data was R² = 0.866; based on Theil's statistic, the deviation from unexplained variance was Uerror = 86%, while the percentage of error associated with model bias and deviation from the 1:1 line was Ubias = 2% and Uslope = 12%, respectively.
In this research, we developed a general, weather-driven, mechanistic model for predicting anthracnose diseases caused by Colletotrichum spp. on aerial plant parts of various hosts in the field. Previous models for anthracnose diseases were species- and crop-specific, focusing on only one component of the pathogen life cycle, primarily conidial infection. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first model that has been developed, calibrated for different clades and host plants, and evaluated to predict anthracnose patterns across multiple crops. Our model is considered "general" as it has a unified conceptual structure that incorporates the key epidemiological components of anthracnose diseases. Although Colletotrichum spp. exhibit various lifestyles—categorized as necrotrophic, hemibiotrophic, latent or quiescent, and endophytic, with hemibiotrophic being the most common—all species have a necrotrophic stage, except for a few that exist entirely as endophytes. The timing of the switch from biotrophy to necrotrophy is influenced by the host, its growth stage, environmental conditions, and the phylogenetic clade. For example, the graminicola and destructivum clades have a sho
Gloeosporioides clades have a quiescent lifestyle on some fruit trees like almond and guava (De Silva et al., 2017). Our model accounts for the common attributes of the Colletotrichum lifestyles in terms of (i) a reproductive (asexual) stage, which occurs on the host plant or in plant debris; (ii) infection caused by conidia; (iii) an asymptomatic (biotrophic) stage that can be short or extended (depending on an incubation period); (iv) a necrotrophic stage in which host cells are invaded and killed, with the appearance of symptoms (lesions in our model); and (v) a sporulation stage, i.e., the production of secondary inoculum on lesions. Our model is weather-driven in that it accounts for the effects of temperature, wetness duration, and rain on the epidemiological components leading to disease development. The model works with an hourly time step to better account for fluctuations in temperature, as well as in wetness duration and wetness interruption that directly influence the epidemiological processes. This ensures more accurate and robust predictions than models that work with a daily time step (Scherm and Van Bruggen, 1994; Narouei-Khandan et al., 2020). To be incorporated into our model, however, new information must have an hourly time step. To design and calibrate the model, we performed a systematic literature search to collect published information on the biological processes involved in the development of epidemics and the weather conditions affecting these processes. Locating and assembling published knowledge through a systematic approach reduces errors, limits search bias, and improves the synthesis of research findings (Candel, 2014; Scherm et al., 2014), facilitating the application of system analysis to the collected information (Rossi et al., 2015). Organization of the available knowledge on the basis of system analysis revealed incomplete information for some biological processes or for some clades (especially the dematium and graminicola clades); to deal with this incomplete information, we made simplifications, m
The model structure described has been successfully applied to various pathosystems across different climates, specifically for cereals and dicotyledon crops. It operates under the assumption that all sites are of equal size, that healthy sites have an equal probability of becoming diseased, and that diseased sites are randomly distributed. However, for anthracnose diseases where lesions enlarge, such as those found on apple and strawberry, the assumption of uniform lesion size may lead to an underestimation of both disease severity and secondary conidia doses. Incorporating a lesion expansion component could enhance the model's accuracy in these cases.
Since Colletotrichum conidia are splash-borne, the assumption of random distribution of diseased sites may not hold true, as diseased sites are likely to cluster spatially. This clustering implies that assuming equal probabilities for all sites to become affected could result in an overestimation of disease severity. Introducing a disease aggregation coefficient in the infection rate calculations could account for this spatial heterogeneity.
Additionally, the model simplifies host plant dynamics by not considering growth and senescence, relying only on growth stages to determine infection susceptibility periods. This could lead to overestimations of healthy sites during early and late seasons when leaf area changes occur. Modifications could include components for host growth and senescence.
The model also oversimplifies host susceptibility, as it does not account for varying levels of susceptibility in fruits, nor the transition from biotrophy to necrotrophy, which depends on physiological and biochemical changes during fruit ripening. The model was calibrated for seven major clades, and the singleton species C. coccodes, due to a lack of specific species-level information. Calibration was conducted at the clade level, and when specific data was absent, parameterization from other clades was used. Further research is required to clarify the effects of wetness on primary inoculum production and its longevity.
Lack of information was also found regarding the effect of wetness on infection by the graminicola clade and the effect of temperature on incubation and latency periods for the dematium clade. In the validation, the model was operated by using equations from the closest related clade, specifically using equations from the destructivum clade for the graminicola clade and from the acutatum clade for the dematium clade. A clade-based calibration has some limitations. For instance, the acutatum clade, which affects strawberry, almond, olive, lupin, and others, showed significant variability in incubation and latency periods depending on the host. At 15°C, the latency period was 5 days on strawberry fruits, 19 days on olive fruits, and about 10 days on lupin. Due to this variability, the equations developed for such polyphagous clades generally had lower CCC values, higher RMSE values, and CRM values further from zero. Effects of high within-clade variability were also reflected in the model validation results, which showed that predictions were better for clades with a small number of species and hosts. The acutatum and gloeosporioides clades, which include multiple species and hosts, had overall CCC values of 0.895 and 0.910, respectively. In contrast, the graminicola clade, a well-defined monophyletic clade encompassing Colletotrichum species mainly associated with grasses, had the highest CCC value of 0.973.
Clade-based calibration may also have advantages. Anthracnose diseases have often been attributed to several Colletotrichum species belonging to the same clade, depending on the region. For example, the main causal agents of olive anthracnose are in the acutatum clade, with C. godetiae dominant in Spain, Italy, Greece, and Tunisia; C. nymphaeae dominant in Portugal; and C. fioriniae dominant in California. Furthermore, proper identification of the Colletotrichum species requires molecular analysis of multiple DNA regions. Since species belonging to the same clade exhibit similar environmental requirements, a clade-based calibration may help overcome knowledge gaps for individual Colletotrichum species, facilitate practical model usage when species identification is not feasible due to capacity or economic constraints, and enable predictions across a broad range of hosts and climatic conditions. Given that the model was validated against independent data and provided accurate and robust predictions of anthracnose epidemics, we conclude that our assumptions and simplifications did not significantly impair the model’s predictive capability. Overall, there was high concordance between model predictions and reality, with a CCC of 0.928, few errors (RMSE = 0.044), and a slight tendency of the model toward overestimation (CRM = –0.052). Unfortunately, data for model validation were only available for five of the eight clades for which the model was parameterized (i.e., acutatum, dematium, gloeosporioides, graminicola, and orbiculare clades). Except for the acutatum clade, validated on strawberry and olive, each clade was validated on only one host. More complete validat
In our model validation, the k dose of primary conidia that can develop from overwintering inoculum sources (crop debris, mummies, and dormant buds) was estimated empirically from disease data. This estimation may not greatly affect the reliability of the model to predict disease progress because it modulates the final value of the disease severity but not its progress. The real value of k in a field may depend on many difficult-to-estimate factors, including the incidence and severity of affected crops in the previous season and the proportion of diseased tissues that remains in the field as an overwintering inoculum source. Inappropriate estimation of k may result in under- or overestimation of infection risk during the season. Further studies are therefore needed to improve the estimation of the abundance of primary inoculum sources at the beginning of the cropping season. Our model is flexible in both design and calibration. For instance, it can easily incorporate components for lesion expansion, plant growth, senescence, or host susceptibility by integrating additional model components and modifiers accounting for resistance components, as has been done with similar models. Model flexibility also enables easy incorporation of new information on pathogen biology and epidemiology, allowing for species-specific or host-specific calibrations that may improve prediction accuracy, especially in hosts or regions where anthracnose disease is caused by a dominant Colletotrichum species or for clades not considered in this work, such as the boniense clade, which is economically important on several Citrus species. Despite some shortcomings mainly related to its simplicity and the scarcity of information available in the literature, our model is promising. After further validation and evaluation of its ability to support risk-based fungicide applications, it could be used for supporting decision-making in crop protection.
The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article/Supplementary Material. Further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author. IS, Y-JL, and VR mainly contributed to the conceptualization of the model. VR provided the methodology and resources for the study. IS, Y-JL, and TJ performed model validation. All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version. This research was funded by the LIFE Programme of the European Union-project LIFE AGRESTIC, grant number LIFE17 CCM/IT/000062. This research work has been developed as a result of a mobility stay of YL funded by the Erasmus+ KA1 Erasmus Mundus Joint Master Degrees Program of the European Commission under the PLANT HEALTH Project. The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest. All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations or the publisher, editors, and reviewers. Any product evaluated in this article, or any claim made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher. The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online.
Analytis, S. (1977). Über die Relation zwischen biologischer Entwicklung und Temperatur bei phytopathogenen Pilzen. J. Phytopathol. 90, 64–76. Andersen, R. N., and Walker, H. L. (1985). Colletotrichum coccodes: A pathogen of eastern black nightshade (Solanum ptycanthum). Weed Sci. 33, 902–905. Anselmi, A. (2023). Un sistema di monitoraggio e di supporto alle decisioni per la gestione sostenibile dell'oliveto. Piacenza (Italy: Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore). Aragaw, G., Chala, A., and Terefe, H. (2021). Spatial distribution and association of factors influencing sorghum anthracnose (Colletotrichum sublineolum) epidemics in Eastern Ethiopia. Int. J. Pest Manage. 67, 20–31. Auld, B. A., McRae, C. F., and Say, M. M. (1989). Potential for Xanthium spinosum control by Colletotrichum orbiculare as a mycoherbicide. In Proceedings VII Symposium of the Biological Control of Weeds. Ed. E. S. Delfosse. Rome: Istituto Sperimentale Patologia Vegetale MAF, 435–443. Aylor, D. E., and Anagnostakis, S. L. (1991). Active discharge distance of ascospores of Venturia inaequalis. Phytopathology 81, 548–551. Berger, R. D., Filho, A. B., and Amorim, L. (1997). Lesion expansion as an epidemic component. Phytopathology 87, 1005–1013. Berner, D., Lagopodi, A. L., Kashefi, J., Mukhina, Z., Kolomiets, T., Pankratova, L., et al. (2014). Field assessment of the facultative saprophytic fungus, Colletotrichum salsolae, for biological control of Russian thistle (Salsola tragus) in Greece and Russia. Biol. Control 76, 114–123. Bertetti, D., Gullino, M. L., and Garibaldi, A. (2009). Effect of leaf wetness duration, temperature, and inoculum concentration on infection of evergreen azalea by Colletotrichum acutatum, the causal agent of anthracnose. J. Plant Pathol. 91, 763–766. Bhagya, N., Sheik, S., Sharma, M. S., and Chandrashekar, K. R. (2011). Isolation of endophytic Colletotrichum gloeosporioides Penz. from Salacia chinensis and its antifungal sensitivity. J. Phytol. 3, 20–22. Bi, Y., Guo, W., Zhang, G. J., Liu, S. C., and Chen, Y. (2017). First r
Candel, J. J. (2014). Food security governance: A systematic literature review. Food Secur. 6, 585–601. Cannon, P. F., Damm, U., Johnston, P. R., and Weir, B. S. (2012). Colletotrichum– current status and future directions. Stud. Mycol. 73, 181–213. Casanova, L., Hernández, L., Martínez, E., Velho, A. C., Rockenbach, M. F., Stadnik, M. J., et al. (2017). First report of glomerella leaf spot of apple caused by Colletotrichum fructicola in Uruguay. Plant Dis. 101, 834. Casela, C. R., and Frederiksen, R. A. (1993). Survival of Colletotrichum graminicola sclerotia in sorghum stalk residues. Plant Dis. 77, 825–827. Chakraborty, S., and Billard, L. (1995). Quantitative relationships between Colletotrichum gloeosporioides infection of Stylosanthes scabra and weather under field conditions. Plant Pathol. 44, 63–72. Chakraborty, S., Ratcliff, D., and McKay, F. J. (1990). Anthracnose of Stylosanthes scabra: effect of leaf surface wetness on disease severity. Plant Dis. 74, 379–384. Chongo, G., and Bernier, C. C. (2000). Effects of host, inoculum concentration, wetness duration, growth stage, and temperature on anthracnose of lentil. Plant Dis. 84, 544–548. Chongo, G., Bernier, C. C., and Buchwaldt, L. (1999). Control of anthracnose in lentil using partial resistance and fungicide applications. Can. J. Plant Pathol. 21, 16–22. Coelho, M. V., Palma, F. R., and Cafe-Filho, A. C. (2008). Management of strawberry anthracnose by choice of irrigation system, mulching material, and host resistance. Int. J. Pest Manage. 54, 347–354. Conner, R. L., Gillard, C. L., McRae, K. B., Hwang, S. F., Chen, Y. Y., Hou, A., et al. (2019). Survival of the bean anthracnose fungus (Colletotric
Danneberger, T. K., Vargas, J. M. Jr., and Jones, A. L. (1984). A model for weather-based forecasting of anthracnose on annual bluegrass. Phytopathology 74, 448–451.
Salotti et al. Datar, V. V. (1995). Pathogenicity and effect of temperature on six fungi causing fruit rot of chilli. J. Mycol. Plant Pathol. 25, 195–197. Daykin, M. E., and Milholland, R. D. (1984). Ripe rot of muscadine grape caused by Colletotrichum gloeosporioides. Phytopathology 74, 710–714. Dean, R., Van Kan, J. A., Pretorius, Z. A., Hammond-Kosack, K. E., Di Pietro, A., Spanu, P. D., et al. (2012). The top 10 fungal pathogens in molecular plant pathology. Mol. Plant Pathol. 13, 414–430.
de Bellaire, L. D. L., Chillet, M., and Mourichon, X. (2000). Elaboration of an early quantification method of quiescent infections of Colletotrichum musae on bananas. Plant Dis. 84, 128–133. de Medeiros, A. M., and Peruch, L. A. M. (2012). Fungicides and silicate clay on the control of anthracnose in yellow passionfruit. Semina.: Ciências Agrárias. 33, 1803–1808.
Denham, T. G., and Waller, J. M. (1981). Some epidemiological aspects of post-bloom fruit drop disease (Colletotrichum gloeosporioides) in citrus. Ann. Appl. Biol. 98, 65–77.
De Silva, D. D., Crous, P. W., Ades, P. K., Hyde, K. D., and Taylor, P. W. (2017). Life styles of Colletotrichum species and implications for plant biosecurity. Fungal Biol. Rev. 31, 155–168.
De Wolf, E. D., and Isard, S. A. (2007). Disease cycle approach to plant disease prediction. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 45, 203–220.
Diao, Y. Z., Zhang, C., Lin, D., and Liu, X. L. (2014). First report of Colletotrichum truncatum causing anthracnose of tomato in China. Plant Dis. 98, 687–687
Diéguez-Uribeondo, J., Förster, H., and Adaskaveg, J. E. (2011). Effect of wetness duration and temperature on the development of anthracnose on selected almond tissues and comparison of cultivar susceptibility. Phytopathology 101, 1013–1020.
Diggle, A. J., Salam, M. U., Thomas, G. J., Yang, H. A., O'Connell, M., and Sweetingham, M. W. (2002). AnthracnoseTracer: a spatiotemporal model for simulating the spread of anthracnose in a lupin field. Phytopathology 92, 1110–1121.
Dillard, H. R. (1989). Effect of temperature, wetness duration, and inoculum density on infection and lesion development of Colletotrichum coccodes on tomato fruit. Phytopathology 79, 1063–1066.
Dillard, H. R., and Cobb, A. C. (1997). Disease progress of black dot on tomato roots and reduction in incidence with foliar applied fungicides. Plant Dis. 81, 1439–1442.
Dillard, H. R., and Cobb, A. C. (1998). Survival of Colletotrichum coccodes in infected tomato tissue and in soil. Plant Dis. 82, 235–238.
Djurle, A., and Yuen, J. E. (1991). A simulation model for Septoria nodorum in winter wheat. Agric. Syst. 37, 193–218.
Dodd, J. C., Estrada, A. B., Matcham, J., Jeffries, P., and Jeger, M. J. (1991). The effect of climatic factors on Colletotrichum gloeosporioides, causal agent of mango anthracnose, in the Philippines. Plant Pathol. 40, 568–575.
Dowling, M., Peres, N., Villani, S., and Schnabel, G. (2020). Managing Colletotrichum on fruit crops: A “complex” challenge. Plant Dis. 104, 2301–2316.
Everett, K. R., Pushparajah, I. P. S., Timudo, O. E., Chee, A. A., Scheper, R. W. A., Shaw, P. W., et al. (2018). Infection criteria, inoculum sources, and splash dispersal pattern of Colletotrichum acutatum causing bitter rot of apple in New Zealand. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 152, 367–383.
Fall, M. L., van der Heyden, H., and Carisse, O. (2016). A quantitative dynamic simulation of Bremia lactucae airborne conidia concentration above a lettuce canopy. PloS One 11, e0144573.
Farley, J. D. (1976). Survival of Colletotrich
Greer, L. A., Harper, J. D., Savocchia, S., Samuelian, S. K., and Steel, C. C. (2011). Ripe rot of south-eastern Australian wine grapes is caused by two species of Colletotrichum: C. acutatum and C. gloeosporioides, with differences in infection and fungicide sensitivity. Aust. J. Grape Wine R. 17, 123–128.
Greer, L. A., Harper, J. D., and Steel, C. C. (2014). Infection of Vitis vinifera (cv Chardonnay) inflorescences by Colletotrichum acutatum and Greeneria uvicola. J. Phytopathol. 162, 407–410.
Griffin, M. S., Sutherland, J. R., and Dennis, J. J. (1987). Blight of conifer seedlings caused by Colletotrichum gloeosporioides. New For. 1, 81–88.
Guyader, S., Crombez, J., Salles, M., Bussière, F., and Bajazet, T. (2013). Modelling the effects of temperature and leaf wetness on monocyclic infection in a tropical fungal pathosystem. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 136, 535–545.
Guyot, J., Omanda, E. N., and Pinard, F. (2005). Some epidemiological investigations on Colletotrichum leaf disease on rubber trees. Crop Prot. 24, 65–77.
Halvorson, J. M., Lamppa, R. S., Simons, K., Conner, R. L., and Pasche, J. S. (2021). Dry bean and anthracnose development from seeds with varying symptom severity. Plant Dis. 105, 392–399.
Han, Y. C., Zeng, X. G., Xiang, F. Y., Ren, L., Chen, F. Y., and Gu, Y. C. (2016). Distribution and characteristics of Colletotrichum spp. associated with anthracnose of strawberry in Hubei, China. Plant Dis. 100, 996–1006.
Hartman, G. L., and Wang, T. C. (1992). Characteristics of two Colletotrichum species and evaluation of resistance to anthracnose in pepper. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Plant Protection in the Tropics, vol. 6. Ed. P. A. C. Ooi (Kuala Lumpur: Malaysian Plant Protection Society), 202–205.
Hempfling, J. W., Clarke, B. B., and Murphy, J. A. (2015). Anthracnose disease on annual bluegrass as influenced by spring and summer topdressing. Crop Sci. 55, 437
Ji, T., Salotti, I., Dong, C., Li, M., and Rossi, V. (2021). Modeling the effects of the environment and the host plant on the ripe rot of grapes, caused by the Colletotrichum species. Plants 10, 2288.
Kenny, M. K., Galea, V. J., and Price, T. V. (2012). Germination and growth of Colletotrichum acutatum and Colletotrichum gloeosporioides isolates from coffee in Papua New Guinea and their pathogenicity to coffee berries. Australas. Plant Pathol. 41, 519–528.
Khan, A., and Hsiang, T. (2003). The infection process of Colletotrichum graminicola and relative aggressiveness on four turfgrass species. Can. J. Plant Pathol. 49, 433–442.
King, W. T., Madden, L. V., Ellis, M. A., and Wilson, L. L. (1997). Effects of temperature on sporulation and latent period of Colletotrichum spp. infecting strawberry fruit. Plant Dis. 81, 77–84.
Kumar, S. (2012). Factors affecting the development of fruit rots of brinjal. Plant Dis. Res. 27, 39–44.
Kumar, A., Sharma, P. N., and Sharma, O. P. (1999). Epidemiology of bean anthracnose Colletotrichum lindemuthianum under sub-humid mid-hills zone of Himachal Pradesh. Indian Phytopathol. 52, 393–397.
Leandro, L. F. S., Gleason, M. L., Nutter, F. W. Jr., Wegulo, S. N., and Dixon, P. M. (2001). Germination and sporulation of Colletotrichum acutatum on symptomless strawberry leaves. Phytopathology 91, 659–664.
Leandro, L. F. S., Gleason, M. L., Nutter, F. W. Jr., Wegulo, S. N., and Dixon, P. M. (2003). Influence of temperature and wetness duration on conidia and appressoria of Colletotrichum acutatum on symptomless strawberry leaves. Phytopathology 93, 513–520.
Leffelaar, P. A., and Ferrari, T. J. (1989). “Some elements of dynamic simulation,” in Simulation and systems management in crop protection. Eds. R. Rabbinge, S. A. Ward, and H. H. van Laar (Netherlands: Pudoc), 19–45.
Leonard, K. J., and Thompson, D. L. (1976). Effects of temperature and host maturity on lesion development of Colletotrichum graminicola on corn. Phytopathology 66, 635–639.
Li, Y. H., and TeBeest, D. O. (2009). Temporal and spatial development of sorghum anthracnose in Arkansas. Plant Dis. 93, 287–292.
Lim, J. Y., Lim, T. H., and Cha, B. J. (2002). Isolation and identification of Colletotrichum musae from imported bananas. Plant Pathol. J. 18, 161–164.
Lima, W. G., Spósito, M. B., Amorim, L., Gonçalves, F. P., and de Filho, P. A. M. (2011). Colletotrichum gloeosporioides, a new causal agent of citrus post-bloom fruit drop. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 131, 157–165.
Lin, L. I. (1989). A concordance correlation coefficient to evaluate reproducibility. Biometrics 45, 255–268.
Ling, L., and Yang, J. Y. (1944). Studies on the biology and pathogenicity of Colletotrichum indicum. Ann. Bot. 8, 91–104.
Liu, F., Weir, B. S., Damm, U., Crous, P. W., Wang, Y., Liu, B., et al. (2015). Unraveling Colletotrichum species associated with camellia: employing ApMat and GS loci to resolve species in the C. gloeosporioides complex. Pers.: Mol. Phylogeny. Evol. 35, 63–86.
Loomis, R. S., and Adams, S. S. (1983). Integrative analyses of host-pathogen relations. *Ann. Rev
Manstretta, V., and Rossi, V. (2015). Modelling the effect of weather on moisture fluctuations in maize stalk residues, an important inoculum source for plant diseases. Agric. For. Meteorol. 207, 83–93.
Manstretta, V., and Rossi, V. (2016). Effects of temperature and moisture on the development of Fusarium graminearum perithecia in maize stalk residues. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 82, 184–191.
McKay, S. F., Shtienberg, D., Sedgley, M., and Scott, E. S. (2014). Anthracnose on almond in Australia: disease progress and inoculum sources of Colletotrichum acutatum. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 139, 773–783.
Miles, T. D., Gillett, J. M., Jarosz, A. M., and Schilder, A. M. C. (2013). The effect of environmental factors on the infection of blueberry fruit by Colletotrichum acutatum. Plant Pathol. 62, 1238–1247.
Monroe, J. S., Santini, J. B., and Latin, R. (1997). A model defining the relationship between temperature and leaf wetness duration, and infection of watermelon by Colletotrichum orbiculare. Plant Dis. 81, 739–742.
Monteiro, J. E. B., Sentelhas, P. C., Gleason, M. L., Esker, P. D., and Chiavegato, E. J. (2009). Development of ramulosis disease of cotton under controlled environment and field conditions. Phytopathology 99, 659–665.
Monteith, J. (1928). Clover anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum trifolii. USDA. Tech. Bull. 28, 1–26.
Moore, J. W., Ditmore, M., and TeBeest, D. O. (2010). Development of anthracnose on grain sorghum hybrids inoculated with recently described pathotypes of Colletotrichum sublineolum found in Arkansas. Plant Dis. 94, 589–595.
Moral, J., de Oliveira, R., and Trapero, A. (2009). Elucidation of the disease cycle of olive anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum acutatum. Phytopathology 99, 548–556.
Moral, J., Jurado-Bello, J., Sánchez, M. I., de Oliveira, R., and Trapero, A. (2012). Effect of temperature, wetness duration, and planting density on olive anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum spp. Phytopathology 102, 974–981.
Moral, J., and Trapero, A. (2012). Mummified fruit as a source of inoculum and disease dynamics of olive anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum spp. Phytopathology 102, 982–989.
Moral, J., Agustí-Brisach, C., Sánchez, M. I., Raya, M. C., Jurado-Bello, J., López Moral, A., et al. (2021). Div
Nita, M., Atwal, A., Bly, A., and Lewallen, K. (2019). The growth rate of apple bitter rot lesions, caused by Colletotrichum spp., is affected by temperature, fungal species, and cultivar. Int. J. Phytopathol. 8, 31–36.
Ntahimpera, N., Dillard, H. R., Cobb, A. C., and Seem, R. C. (1996). Anthracnose development in mixtures of resistant and susceptible dry bean cultivars. Phytopathology 86, 668–673.
Ntahimpera, N., Wilson, L. L., Ellis, M. A., and Madden, L. V. (1999). Comparison of rain effects on splash dispersal of three Colletotrichum species infecting strawberry. Phytopathology 89, 555–563.
O'Connell, R. J., Thon, M. R., Hacquard, S., Amyotte, S. G., Kleemann, J., Torres, M. F., et al. (2012). Lifestyle transitions in plant pathogenic Colletotrichum fungi deciphered by genome and transcriptome analyses. Nat. Genet. 44, 1060–1065.
Okoli, C., and Schabram, K. (2010). A guide to conducting a systematic literature review of information systems research. Papers. Inf. Syst. 10, 1–46.
Pandey, R. R., Arora, D. K., and Dubey, R. C. (1997). Effect of environmental conditions and inoculum density on infection of guava fruits by Colletotrichum gloeosporioides. Mycopathologia 137, 165–172.
Park, E. W., Hur, J. S., and Yun, S. C. (1992). A forecasting system for scheduling fungicide sprays to control grape ripe rot caused by Colletotrichum gloeosporioides. Korean. J. Plant Pathol. 8, 177–184.
Pastor-Corrales, M., and Frederiksen, R. (1978). “Sorghum anthracnose,” in Sorghum diseases: a world review. Proceedings of the International Workshop on Sorghum Diseases. Eds. R. J. Williams, R. A. Frederiksen, and L. K. Mughogho (Patancheru, India: International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics), 289–291.
Peres, N. A., Timmer, L. W., Adaskaveg, J. E., and Correll, J. C. (2005). Lifestyles of Colletotrichum acutatum. Plant Dis. 89, 784–796.
Perfect, S. E., Hughes, H. B., O'Connell, R. J., and Green, J. R. (1999). Colletotrichum: a mod
M. K. (2018). Inoculation method, temperature, and relative humidity affect leaf neck anthracnose, a new onion disease in Michigan. Plant Health Prog. 19, 64–68. Rodriguez-Salamanca, L. M., Quesada-Ocampo, L. M., Naegele, R. P., and Hausbeck, M. K. (2015). Characterization, virulence, epidemiology, and management of anthracnose in celery. Plant Dis. 99, 1832–1840. Rossi, V., Caffi, T., Bugiani, R., Spanna, F., and Valle, D. D. (2008). Estimating the germination dynamics of Plasmopara viticola oospores using hydro-thermal time. Plant Pathol. 57, 216–226. Rossi, V., Caffi, T., and Salinari, F. (2012). Helping farmers face the increasing complexity of decision-making for crop protection. Phytopathol. Mediterr. 51, 457–479. Rossi, V., Giosuè, S., and Caffi, T. (2010). “Modelling plant diseases for decision making in crop protection,” in Precision crop protection—the challenge and use of heterogeneity. Eds. R. Gerhards, E. C. Oerke, G. Menz, and R. A. Sikora (Dordrecht: The Netherlands, Springer), 241–258. Rossi, V., Onesti, G., Legler, S. E., and Caffi, T. (2015). Use of systems analysis to develop plant disease models based on literature data: grape black-rot as a case study. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 141, 427–444. Rossi, V., Racca, P., Giosuè, S., Pancaldi, D., and Alberti, I. (1997). A simulation model for the development of brown rust epidemics in winter wheat. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 103, 453–465.
Rossi, V., Sperandio, G., Caffi, T., Simonetto, A., and Gilioli, G. (2019). Critical success factors for the adoption of decision tools in IPM. Agronomy 9, 710.
Saha, P., and Bera, S. (2021). Weather impact assessment and development of prediction model for yield loss in chilli anthracnose patho-system. J. Agrometeorol. 23, 352–355.
Salotti, I., Ji, T., and Rossi, V. (2022). Temperature requirements of Colletotrichum spp. belonging to different clades. Front. Plant Sci. 13.
Samuelian, S. K., Greer, L. A., Savocchia, S., and Steel, C. C. (2012). Overwintering and presence of Colletotrichum acutatum (ripe rot) on mummified bunches, dormant wood, developing tissues, and mature berries of Vitis 51, 33–37.
Sanders, G. M., and Korsten, L. (2003). A comparative morphological study of South African avocado and mango isolates of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides. Can. J. Bot. 81, 877–885.
Sangpueak, R., Phansak, P., and Buensanteai, N. (2018). Morphological and molecular identification of Colletotrichum species associated with cassava anthracnose in Thailand. J. Phytopathol. 166, 129–142.
Sanogo, S., Stevenson, R. E., and Pennypacker, S. P. (2003). Appressorium formation and tomato fruit infection by Colletotrichum coccodes. Plant Dis. 87, 336–340.
Sanz-Cortés, F., Martinez-Calvo, J., Badenes, M. L., Bleiholder, H., Hack, H., Llácer, G., et al. (2002). Phenological growth stages of olive trees (Olea europaea). Ann. App. Biol. 140, 151–157.
Savary, S., Stetkiewicz, S., Brun, F., and Willocquet, L. (2015). Modelling and mapping potential epidemics of wheat diseases–examples on leaf rust and septoria tritici blotch using EPIWHEAT. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 142, 771–790.
Saxena, A., Raghuwanshi, R., Gupta, V. K., and Singh, H. B. (2016). Chilli anthracnose: the epidemiology and management. Front. Microbiol. 7.
Schein, R. D. (1963). Biometeorology and plant disease. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc 44, 499–504.
Scherm, H., Thomas, C. S., Garrett, K. A., and Olsen, J. M. (2014). Meta-analysis and other approaches for synthesizing structured and unstructured data in plant pathology. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 52, 453–476.
Scherm, H., and Van Bruggen, A. H. C. (1994). Effects of fluctuating temperatures on the latent period of lettuce d
Stensvand, A., Børve, J., and Talgø, V. (2017). Overwintering diseased plant parts and newly infected flowers and fruit as sources of inoculum for Colletotrichum acutatum in sour cherry. Plant Dis. 101, 1207–1213.
Sun, P., and Zeng, S. (1994). On the measurement of the corrected basic infection rate. J. Plant Dis. Prot. 101, 297–302.
Sweetmore, A., Simons, S. A., and Kenward, M. (1994). Comparison of disease progress curves for yam anthracnose (Colletotrichum gloeosporioides). Plant Pathol. 43, 206–215.
Talhinhas, P., and Baroncelli, R. (2021). Colletotrichum species and complexes: Geographic distribution, host range and conservation status. Fungal Div. 110, 109–198.
Thomas, G. J., and Sweetingham, M. W. (2004). Cultivar and environment influence the development of lupin anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum lupini. Australas. Plant Pathol. 33, 571–577.
Thompson, D. C., and Jenkins, S. F. (1985). Effect of temperature, moisture, and cucumber cultivar resistance on lesion size increase and conidial production by Colletotrichum lagenarium. Phytopathology 75, 828–832.
Turechek, W. W., Peres, N. A., and Werner, N. A. (2006). Pre-and post-infection activity of pyraclostrobin for control of anthracnose fruit rot of strawberry caused by Colletotrichum acutatum. Plant Dis. 90, 862–868.
Uematsu, S., Kageyama, K., Moriwaki, J., and Sato, T. (2012). Colletotrichum carthami comb. nov., an anthracnose pathogen of safflower, garland chrysanthemum and pot marigold, revived by molecular phylogeny with authentic herbarium specimens. J. Gen. Plant Pathol. 78, 316–330.
Uysal, A., and Kurt, Ş (2017). Influence of inoculum density, temperature, wetness duration, and leaf age on infection and development of spinach anthracnose caused by the fungal pathogen Colletotrichum spinaciae. Eur. J. Plant Pathol. 149, 1041–1052.
Uysal, A., an
Weir, B. S., Johnston, P. R., and Damm, U. (2012). The Colletotrichum gloeosporioides species complex. Stud. Mycol. 73, 115–180. Wharton, P. S., Julian, A. M., and O'Connell, R. J. (2001). Ultrastructure of the infection of sorghum bicolor by Colletotrichum sublineolum. Phytopathology 91, 149–158. Wickham, H. (2019). Modelr: Modelling functions that work with the pipe. Wilson, L. L., Madden, L. V., and Ellis, M. A. (1990). Influence of temperature and wetness duration on infection of immature and mature strawberry fruit by Colletotrichum acutatum. Phytopathology 80, 111–116. Yang, Y. K., Kim, S. O., Chung, H. S., and Lee, Y. H. (2000). Use of Colletotrichum graminicola KA001 to control barnyard grass. Plant Dis. 84, 55–59. Yoshida, S., Shirata, A., and Hiradate, S. (2002). Ecological characteristics and biological control of mulberry anthracnose. Jpn. Agric. Res. Q. 36, 89–95. Yun, S. C., and Park, E. W. (1990). Effects of temperature and wetness period on infection of grape by Colletotrichum gloeosporioides. Korean. J. Plant Pathol. 6, 219–228. Zadoks, J. C. (1971). Systems analysis and the dynamics of epidemics. Phytopathology 61, 600–610. Zakaria, L. (2021). Diversity of Colletotrichum species associated with anthracnose disease in tropical fruit crops: a review. Agriculture 11, 297. Zhao, D., He, H., and Yang, X. (2020). Strawberry leaves infected by Colletotrichum fragariae: effect of temperature and humidity. J. Agric. For. 10, 22–26. Zulfiqar, M., Brlansky, R. H., and Timmer, L. W. (1996). Infection of flower and vegetative tissues of citrus by Colletotrichum acutatum and C. gloeosporioides.
Development of a model for Colletotrichum diseases with calibration for phylogenetic clades on different host plants
Introduction
Materials and methods 2.1. Literature search
2.2. Conceptualization of the system
2.3. Model development
2.4. Model evaluation
Results 3.1. Model description
3.1.1. Production of primary inoculum
3.1.2. Dispersal of conidia
3.1.3. Infection by conidia
3.1.4. Incubation and latency periods
3.1.5. Infectious period and secondary inoculum production
3.1.6. Predicted disease severity
3.2. Model evaluation
Discussion
Data availability statement
Author contributions
Funding
Acknowledgments
Supplementary material
References
