Macro- and Microelement Fertilizers Influence the Severity of Fusarium Crown and Root Rot of Tomato in a Soilless Production System
Article in HortScience · April 1999
CITATIONS 61 READS 431
Authors: B.K. Duffy and G. Défago
Affiliation: Phytopathology Group, Institute of Plant Sciences, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zürich, Switzerland
Additional index words: Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. radicis-lycopersici, hydroponics, Lycopersicon esculentum, root disease, nutrition
Abstract: Host nutritional variables were evaluated for their effects on the severity of crown and root rot of tomato caused by Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. radicis-lycopersici. Tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.) seedlings (cv. Bonnie Best) were grown in a pathogen-infested, soilless rockwool system in the greenhouse and were fertilized with a nutrient solution that was amended with macro- and microelements at various rates. Disease was evaluated after 2 weeks using an index of 0 to 4, and plant fresh weight was measured.
Regression analysis indicated that disease severity was significantly increased by ammonium-nitrogen sources [NH4Cl, (NH4)6Mo7O24, and (NH4)2SO4], NaH2PO4·H2O, Fe-EDDHA, MnSO4, MoO3, and ZnSO4·7H2O. Disease severity was reduced by nitrate-nitrogen [Ca(NO3)2·4H2O] and CuSO4·H2O. Low rates of NH4NO3 (39 to 79 mg·L–1 N) reduced disease, but rates above 100 mg·L–1 N increased it. Disease was not affected by MgSO4·7H2O. In all cases, plant growth was inversely related to disease severity. Mineral fertilizers had no effect on nutrient solution pH. This information sheds new light on environmental factors that influence plant–pathogen interactions and may be applied to develop a management strategy for Fusarium crown and root rot based on host nutrition. While past approaches have proven technically impractical in hydroponic production systems, alternative control measures are needed, ideally to develop an integrated disease management strategy. The nutritional status of a plant significantly impacts disease susceptibility, and this has been utilized to suppress a variety of diseases. Notable examples include Fusarium wilts caused by F. oxysporum formae specialis, with reports dating back to the 1920s describing the beneficial effect of lime amendments. Since then, the effects of most major and minor nutrients on wilt diseases have been extensively studied. Researchers have applied this information to develop effective fertilizer-based management strategies for Fusarium wilt of tomato, which are now used in commercial production systems in the United States. Similar approaches have successfully controlled Fusarium wilts in other vegetable and ornamental crops. In contrast, little is currently known about the influence of plant nutrition on crown and root rot of tomato. Previous studies tested single concentrations of nitrogenous fertilizers and sodium chloride and did not examine the influence of other potentially critical mineral nutrients, particularly microelements. The objective of our study was to compare the effects of several macro- and microelements (various ammonium-N sources, nitrate-N, sodium phosphate, iron, molybdenum, and copper-, magnesium-, manganese-, and zinc sulfates) on disease severity and growth of tomato seedlings. Mineral nutrients were tested across a range of concentrations to provide more information that can be applied to develop a fertilizer-based management strategy and for integrating mineral fertilizers with other control approaches, such as biocontrol, that may be sensitive to mineral levels.
The influence of various mineral nutrients on Fusarium crown and root rot was evaluated in a noncirculating hydroponics system. Pregerminated tomato seeds of the Bonnie Best variety were planted in rockwool cubes. The rockwool was saturated with a dilute (1/4 strength) Knop nutrient solution. This solution contained specific concentrations of calcium nitrate, potassium phosphate, potassium chloride, magnesium sulfate, and iron-EDDHA. Autoclave-sterilized stock solutions of the various minerals tested were added to the nutrient solution just before use to ensure freshness and effectiveness in the experiment.
Crown and root rot of tomato (also referred to as foot and root rot) caused by Fusarium oxysporum Schlechtend.
. f.sp. radicis lycopersici Jarvis & Shoemaker was first described in Japan in the late 1970s and has since become an economically important problem in greenhouse tomato production throughout Europe, North America, Japan, and Israel. It is considered the most destructive tomato disease caused by a non-zoosporic pathogen in soilless hydroponics production systems, where reductions in marketable yield can exceed 60%. Tomato plants can be infected at any time, but losses are especially severe when infection occurs at the seedling stage. Symptoms include dark brown necrotic lesions that form on the roots and crown region, which may extend up the hypocotyl, stem, and foliage; localized discoloration of the vascular tissues; and subsequent leaf chlorosis, wilting, and death. The pathogen is spread via infected transplants, which often carry latent infections. It can then grow to some extent through soil to infect adjacent plants. The threat to tomato production is further increased by infection from airborne conidia produced in stem lesions, which are dispersed by wind and fungus gnats (Bradysia sp.). Control of Fusarium crown and root rot on tomato has been difficult and will probably require multiple approaches. Only a few resistant cultivars are available. Fungicides, including benomyl, captafol, imazalil, thiram, and prochloraz-Mn, provide inconsistent control, leave problematic residues in edible tissues, and are often phytotoxic even when applied at recommended rates, especially on seedlings. Biological control utilizing fungal agents (i.e., Trichoderma harzianum and nonpathogenic Fusarium oxysporum and F. solani) and bacterial agents (i.e., Bacillus subtilis and Pseudomonas sp.) typically provides only a moderate level of disease suppression in the greenhouse and field. Allelopathy from lettuce (Lactuca sativa) and dandelion (Taraxacum Weber sect. ruderalia sp. Kirschner) residues incorporated into soil provides limited control.
Received for publication 3 Aug. 1998. Accepted for publication 21 Oct. 1998. We thank Barbara Pärli and Ingeborg Kump for technical assistance, Jacques Fuchs and Marcello Zala for valuable advice in developing the disease assay, and Emmanuel Frossard, ETH Zürich, and David Weller, USDA–ARS Pullman, Wash., for comments on the manuscript. The cost of publishing this paper was defrayed in part by the payment of page charges. Under postal regulations, this paper therefore must be hereby marked advertisement solely to indicate this fact.
HORTSCIENCE, VOL. 34(2), APRIL 1999
To evaluate the disease, a range of final concentrations was measured, and the pH was recorded with a digital meter. Prior to saturating the rockwool, the nutrient solution was inoculated with F. oxysporum to achieve approximately 10^5 microconidia plus mycelial fragments per mL, as previously described. Mycelial fragments were included because preliminary experiments indicated that inoculation with microconidia alone resulted in little or no disease.
Inoculum was produced by growing the pathogen in 150 mL of 2% malt extract broth (pH 5.5) in 500-mL baffled Erlenmeyer flasks at 24 °C for 5–7 days with shaking at 130 rpm. Cultures were centrifuged for 15 minutes at 2200 gn to collect fungal biomass, which was then briefly homogenized in an electric blender immediately before adding it to the nutrient solution. Plants were grown in a growth chamber in the greenhouse with 16 hours of light and 8 hours of darkness, at 22 °C during the day and 18 °C at night, with 70% relative humidity. Lower temperatures favor the development of crown and root rot, in contrast to the warmer temperatures (approximately 28 °C) that favor Fusarium wilt (Jones et al., 1991). Millipore-filtered bi-distilled water (0.05 µm) was added as needed to maintain a solution level of 1 to 2 cm. Fourteen days after planting, tomato seedlings were carefully removed from the rockwool with the upper 1.5 cm of the root system attached. They were weighed, and disease severity was rated on a scale of 0 to 4 (adapted from Mihuta-Grimm et al., 1990) where 0 = symptomless; 1 = slight brown discoloration of the upper root system; 2 = moderate brown discoloration of two-thirds or less of the upper root system; 3 = extreme brown discoloration of the upper root system with numerous necrotic lesions extending up the crown and stem; and 4 = seedling dead or nearly so. Representative samples of necrotic tissue were plated onto Komada’s selective medium to confirm F. oxysporum f.sp. radicis-lycopersici as the cause of symptoms. Mineral nutrient treatments were used at seven rates, each consisting of three replicates over time with 12 to 20 plants per replicate, and were arranged in a completely randomized design. Data for each mineral nutrient treatment were analyzed separately. Relationships between nutrient rate and disease severity as well as plant weight were evaluated using regression procedures. Adjusted regression coefficients, which stabilize to a certain value when an adequate set of variables is included in the model, were derived as an alternative to r², which can be driven to 1 by adding superfluous variables to the model with no real improvement in fit.
Results and Discussion: Twelve mineral nutrients were tested separately for their influence on Fusarium crown and root rot. A similar and moderate level of disease severity was observed. Nitrogen was supplied at planting in various forms: (A) (NH4)2SO4, (B) Ca(NO3)2·4H2O, (C) NH4Cl, and (D) NH4NO3. The results showed significant adjusted regression coefficients, indicating strong relationships at P ≤ 0.0001. However, low adjusted r² values for (D) (0.45) reflected different trends at low and high nitrogen concentrations.
The influence of nitrogen on the growth of Fusarium-infected tomato seedlings was also assessed, with significant results at P = 0.0001. For sodium phosphate and magnesium sulfate treatments, adjustments showed significant relationships for A–B at P ≤ 0.0009, while differences in C–D were nonsignificant (P ≥ 0.6000). Vertical bars in the figures represented ± standard error of the mean.
Crotic lesions forming at the crown generally appeared within a week of emergence. This was often followed by severe chlorosis and loss of turgor. No signs of vascular infection were observed beyond the area of superficial necrosis. Severe disease (1–2 rating on a scale of 4) developed in all control treatments that were provided with the standard nutrient solution (no additional minerals). Disease developed rapidly in affected seedlings, with mean ratings of 3–4 in treatments provided with ammonium-N, phosphate, iron, zinc, manganese, and molybdenum. At higher concentrations tested, infected seedlings often failed to emerge. Seedlings showing no symptoms after 10 days usually remained healthy even when left to mature, likely due to poor spread of the pathogen in rockwool. In all treatments, the fresh weight of seedlings was inversely correlated with the severity of Fusarium crown and root rot, supporting previous observations for this disease. Windborne and insect-transmitted spores were not a factor in this study, as noninoculated plants placed in the greenhouse remained disease-free. Nitrogen form significantly influenced the severity of Fusarium crown and root rot and the growth of tomato seedlings in a soilless rockwool system. Increasing concentrations of nitrate-N reduced disease and improved plant growth compared to ammonium forms. Ammonium sulfate and ammonium chloride produced similar responses, implicating NH4+ as the harmful component. Ammonium nitrate has been reported to either have no influence on Fusarium diseases or to increase disease similar to ammonium N. While this was generally true for Fusarium crown and root rot, testing a range of concentrations showed that at low concentrations (10 to 100 mg·L–1 N), ammonium nitrate reduced disease similarly to nitrate-N. However, the negative influence of the NH4+ ion became evident at concentrations above 125 mg·L–1 N. At higher concentrations, seedlings may not have had sufficient available carbohydrates to convert the excess ammonium, which is toxic for tomato seedlings, to non-toxic amino acids. Nitrates have long been recognized for reducing seedling disease caused by Rhizoctonia solani; however, contradictory results have been reported for Fusarium crown and root rot. It was noted that nitrogen supplied as a 20N–20P–20K fertilizer had no effect on the growth of F. oxysporum f.sp. radicis-lycopersici in rockwool compared to non-fertilized treatments. Other studies found no effect of nitrogen form on disease or yield when adequate lime was provided to negate potential pH effects. A differential effect of nitrogen form on pH is a major mechanism of action for suppressing many soilborne pathogens. In contrast, some reports indicated that nitrate versus ammonium-N reduced the severity of crown and root rot without affecting soil pH. Similarly, no effect of nitrogen fertilization (or any other mineral amendment) on pH of the hydroponic solution was observed. In both studies, only pH values were noted
EDDHA were provided at planting. Values represent the means per plant in three trials. Adjusted regression coefficients and line derivations were significant at P ≤ 0.0008. Vertical bars represent ± standard error of the mean.
The influence of micronutrients on tomato seedling growth after two weeks in rockwool infested with Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. radicis-lycopersici was observed. Amendments included CuSO4·5H2O, ZnSO4·7H2O, MnSO4, MoO3, (NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O, and Fe-EDDHA, provided at planting. Values represent the means per plant in three trials. Adjusted regression coefficients and line derivations were significant at P ≤ 0.0007 for all treatments except A and F, where P = 0.0504 and 0.0091, respectively. Vertical bars represent ± standard error of the mean.
The bulk media's pH was measured, and localized pH effects in the rhizosphere, where the disease occurs, cannot be excluded (Smiley, 1975). Another potential factor is total calcium concentrations, which increased with liming and calcium nitrates used in our study and that of Woltz et al. (1992). They found that treatments increasing calcium content also reduced disease. Adequate calcium in tomato tissues is important for resistance to cell-wall-degrading enzymes (e.g., polygalacturonase) produced by Fusarium sp., although it is generally considered a minor factor in disease control (Jones et al., 1989). Sodium phosphate increased disease severity and reduced tomato growth. Similar results with various phosphorus forms have been reported for wilt diseases caused by related formae speciali (Jones et al., 1989), attributed in part to enhanced calcium uptake (Jarvis, 1992). While the effects of sodium cannot be excluded, exhaustive studies on other Fusarium diseases, such as celery yellows (Schneider, 1985) and asparagus wilt (Elmer, 1992, 1995), revealed no influence of the Na2+ ion. Magnesium sulfate fertilization had no effect on Fusarium crown and root rot at concentrations up to 250 mg·L–1 Mg. This is the first examination of magnesium on F. oxysporum independent of the Cl2+ ion. Previous work demonstrated that MgCl2 fertilization increased wilt caused by F. oxysporum formae speciali on tomato (Jones et al., 1989) and celery (Schneider, 1985), where Cl2+ was suspected to be the problematic ion, a conclusion supported by our results.
Copper sulfate effectively reduced disease severity and improved tomato growth at concentrations above 20 mg·L–1 Cu. This aligns with the historical use of Cu2+ as a broad-spectrum fungicide. No phytotoxicity was observed, even at the highest concentrations tested. In contrast, all other micronutrients tested aggravated disease and stunted growth. Zinc and manganese increased disease at concentrations above 40 and 50 mg·L–1, respectively. Molybdenum increased disease at concentrations of 20 mg·L–1 and above. Ammonium molybdate was more conducive to disease than molybdenum oxide, possibly due to the additive influence of the NH4+ ions. Iron added as Fe-EDDHA increased disease at concentrations of just 5 mg·L–1 and greater, with only slight further increases until over 80 mg·L–1. We found no evidence for the induction of host defenses by zinc, iron, or manganese, as su
Plants supplied with zinc or ammonium molybdate at 33 mg·L–1 exhibited no signs of toxicity in the absence of the pathogen. However, node length declined with higher concentrations, suggesting that phytotoxicity, as well as increased disease, possibly contributed to reductions in fresh weight. While excessive concentrations are uncommon in agricultural soils and hydroponics, their availability can be increased under certain conditions, such as acidification. Incidentally, acidic pH also favors crown and root rot. Inert materials such as rockwool tend to reduce plant sensitivity to minerals. Plants may also be exposed to elevated mineral concentrations applied to improve the beneficial activity of biological control strains of Pseudomonas fluorescens. Results of our study facilitate the development of such microbe–mineral fertilizer treatments with minimal adverse side effects on the host plant, information that has been lacking. They also accentuate the need to develop methods for more efficient delivery of potentially phytotoxic minerals. Exactly how mineral nutrients influence disease is uncertain, but effects on pathogen activity and host susceptibility are probably involved. Fusarium oxysporum has a relatively high requirement for micronutrients. Concentrations of zinc, iron, manganese, and other metals above those typically found in soil and nutrient solutions stimulate fungal growth and sporulation. The profile of secondary metabolites produced by the pathogen, including phytotoxic compounds like fusaric acid, is also altered. Nitrates inhibit both sporulation and spore germination, while ammonium has the opposite effect. Fertilization with nitrate-N decreases the sensitivity of tomato to fusaric acid, a phytotoxin produced in infected plants by Fusarium oxysporum. Susceptibility of tomato to fungal attack is increased by zinc, in part because zinc raises the sugar level in plant tissues. Host susceptibility can also be altered by interactions between minerals, particularly at elevated concentrations, which impact the availability of other nutrients. For example, ammonium-N interferes with the uptake of nitrates and potassium, which in turn stimulates chloride uptake, leading to increased susceptibility of tomato to F. oxysporum f.sp. lycopersici. Disease suppression with minerals has also been attributed to the stimulation of indigenous populations of antagonistic microorganisms in the soil and rhizosphere. While this is generally not relevant to hydroponics, recent work indicates that minerals can be exploited to improve the beneficial activity of introduced biocontrol agents in soilless culture. Our results build on those of previous studies and provide a foundation for developing a control strategy based on plant nutrition. Such an approach has been successfully applied to manage other Fusarium diseases. Mineral nutrient effects on crown and root rot of tomato caused by F. oxysporum f.sp. radicis-lycopersici were similar to those reported for other formae speciali, which reflects the adaptability of control strategies for various Fusarium diseases. It further suggests biological similarity of these pathogens and/or similar responses of diverse hosts to these fungi.
Fusarium crown and root rot, however, is not the only problem threatening hydroponically grown tomatoes, and nontarget effects of certain mineral nutrients on other diseases need to be considered. A prominent example is nitrate-N, which reduces crown and root rot but increases the severity of economically devastating diseases caused by Pythium and phytopathogenic bacteria. Integrating mineral nutrients with newly developed resistant cultivars, biocontrol agents, and/or fungicides used at reduced, nonphytotoxic concentrations may enhance the level and spectrum of disease control.
Literature Cited
Barna, B., A.R.T. Sarna, and Z. Király. 1983. The influence of nitrogen nutrition on the sensitivity of tomato plants to culture filtrates of Fusarium and to fusaric acid. Physiol. Plant Pathol. 23:257–263.
Bochow, H., S. Dolej, I. Fischer, and M. Alemayehu. 1996. Modes of action in biocontrolling fungal seedling and root rot diseases by Bacillus subtilis. In: C. Alabouvette (ed.). Biological and integrated control of root diseases in soilless cultures. IOBC wprs Bul. vol. 19. p. 99–108.
Duffy, B.K. and G. Défago. 1997. Zinc amendment improves the biocontrol of tomato crown and root rot by Pseudomonas fluorescens and represses the production of pathogen metabolites inhibitory to bacterial antibiotic biosynthesis. Phytopathology 87:1250–1257.
Egli, T.A. 1969. Untersuchungen über den Einfluss von Schwermetallen auf Fusarium lycopersici Sacc. und den Krankheitsverlauf der Tomatenwelke. J. Phytopathol. 66:223–252.
Elmer, W.H. 1992. Suppression of Fusarium crown and root rot of asparagus with sodium chloride. Phytopathology 82:97–104.
Elmer, W.H. 1995. The association among Mn reducing bacteria and sodium chloride applications in the suppression of Fusarium crown and root rot of asparagus. Phytopathology 85:1461–1467.
Engelhard, A.W. (ed.). 1989. Soilborne plant pathogens: Management of diseases with macro- and microelements. APS Press, St. Paul, Minn.
Erb, W.A. and R.C. Rowe. 1992. Screening tomato seedlings for multiple disease resistance. J. Amer. Soc. Hort. Sci. 117:622–627.
Gillespie, D.R. and J.G. Menzies. 1993. Fungus gnats vector Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. radicis lycopersici. Ann. Appl. Biol. 123:539–544.
Hartman, J.R. and J.T. Fletcher. 1991. Fusarium crown and root rot of tomatoes in the UK. Plant Pathol. 40:85–92.
Heremans, B. 1996. Development of a rapid method for screening the resistance of tomato plants to Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. radicis-lycopersici. Med. Fac. Landb. Toeg. Biol. Wetensch. Univ. Gent 61(2A):337–341.
Huber, D.M. and R.D. Watson. 1974. Nitrog
Louter, J.H. and L.V. Edgington. 1990. Indications of cross-protection against Fusarium crown and root rot of tomato. Can. J. Plant Pathol. 12:283–288. Mandal, N.C. and A.K. Sinha. 1992. An alternative approach for the chemical control of Fusarium wilt of tomato. Indian Phytopathol. 45:194–198. Mihuta-Grimm, L., W.A. Erb, and R.C. Rowe. 1990. Fusarium crown and root rot of tomato in greenhouse rock wool systems: Sources of inoculum and disease management with benomyl. Plant Dis. 74:996–1002. M’Piga, P., R.R. Bélanger, T.C. Paulitz, and N. Benhamou. 1997. Increased resistance to Fusarium oxysporum f.sp. radicis-lycopersici in tomato plants treated with the endophytic bacterium Pseudomonas fluorescens strain 63 28. Physiol. Mol. Plant Pathol. 50:301–320. Pate, J.S. 1973. Uptake, assimilation, and transport of nitrogen compounds by plants. Soil Biol. Biochem. 5:109–119. Rowe, R.C. and J.D. Farley. 1981. Strategies for controlling Fusarium crown and root rot in greenhouse tomatoes. Plant Dis. 65:107–112. Schneider, R.W. 1985. Suppression of Fusarium yellows of celery with potassium, chloride, and nitrate. Phytopathology 75:40–48. Schumann, G.L. 1991. Plant diseases: Their biology and social impact. APS Press, St. Paul, Minn. Sivan, A., O. Ucko, and I. Chet. 1987. Biological control of Fusarium crown rot of tomato by Trichoderma harzianum under field conditions. Plant Dis. 71:587–592. Smiley, R.W. 1975. Forms of nitrogen and the pH in the root zone and their importance to root infections, p. 55–62. In: G.W. Bruehl (ed.). Biology and control of soil-borne plant pathogens. APS Press, St. Paul, Minn. Stanghellini, M.E. and S.L. Rasmussen. 1994. Hydroponics: A solution for zoosporic pathogens. Plant Dis. 78:1129–1138. Sugahara, S. and Y. Sakurai. 1991. Breeding of “Sanpou First 60”: A new tomato cultivar resistant to Fusarium crown and root rot. Res. Bul. Aichi-Ken Agr. Res. Ctr. 23:163–170. Woltz, S.S., J.P. Jones, and J.W. Scott. 1992. Sodium chloride, nitrogen source, and lime influence Fusarium crown rot severity in tomato. HortScience 27:1087–1088. Ziegler, H. 1983. Die Nährstoffe und ihr Umsatz in der Pflanze. 2. Verfügbarkeit der Nährelemente, p. 334–336. In: E. Strassburger, F. Noll, H. Schenk, and A.F.W. Schimper (eds.). Lehrbuch der Botanik. Gustav Fischer Verlag
