Research
Natamycin, a New Biofungicide for Managing Crown Rot of Strawberry Caused by QoI-Resistant Colletotrichum acutatum
Stacey E. Haack, Department of Microbiology and Plant Pathology, University of California, Riverside; Kelly L. Ivors and Gerald J. Holmes, Strawberry Center, California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo; Helga Förster, and James E. Adaskaveg, Department of Plant Pathology and Microbiology, University of California, Riverside
Abstract
Anthracnose crown rot of strawberry, caused by Colletotrichum acutatum, is an important disease affecting California nursery and fruit production. Preplant dip treatments of transplants with fludioxonil-cyprodinil or azoxystrobin are industry standards for managing the disease and have been used extensively. Following reports of reduced efficacy of azoxystrobin in the field, high levels of quinone outside inhibitor (QoI) resistance were detected in California isolates of the pathogen. Resistance was associated with the G143A mutation in the cytochrome b gene, similar to a previous report from Florida, and there were no detected fitness penalties in pathogenicity or virulence. Therefore, several alternative fungicides were investigated in laboratory and field studies. Subsequently, the new biofungicide natamycin was identified. Baseline sensitivities of 74 isolates of C. acutatum to natamycin were determined to be unimodal, with a range from 0.526 to 1.996 mg/ml (mean 0.973 mg/ml). Although this toxicity was considerably lower than that of azoxystrobin (using sensitive isolates), fludioxonil, or cyprodinil, dip treatments of transplants with natamycin (at 500 or 1000 mg/liter) were highly effective. Disease severity and plant mortality in field studies with inoculated transplants were reduced to similarly low levels as treatments containing fludioxonil, whereas azoxystrobin failed in inoculations with QoI-resistant isolates of C. acutatum. Fruit yield was also significantly increased by natamycin as compared with the inoculated control. Differences in disease susceptibility were observed among cultivars evaluated, with Monterey and Portola being more susceptible than Fronteras. Natamycin has a unique mode of action that is different from other fungicides registered on strawberry and, based on this research, was registered in the United States as a preplant biofungicide dip treatment of strawberry transplants for management of anthracnose crown rot.
Anthracnose is a major disease of strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa Duch.) in California nursery and fruit production, an industry that represents 83% of fresh market fruit production in the United States and is estimated to have a value of over $1.8 billion annually. All parts of the plant are susceptible to infection, resulting in significant yield loss from any of the different phases of the disease, including crown rot, root rot, flower blight, fruit rot (i.e., black spot), petiole lesions, and leaf spots. Members of the fungal genus Colletotrichum are associated with strawberry anthracnose worldwide, with Colletotrichum gloeosporioides and occasionally C. fragariae most commonly causing crown rot and root rot, while C. acutatum is most commonly causing foliar and fruit rot. In California, however, C. acutatum is the most common causal agent for all above- and belowground phases of the disease. More recently, C. gloeosporioides and C. acutatum have been considered to be species complexes. Salmon- to orange-colored conidial masses are produced by the pathogen.
C. acutatum in acervuli on infected tissues thrives in high humidity. The pathogen spreads short distances through water splash from overhead sprinkler irrigation or rainfall, and long distances via infected plant material, soil associated with transplants, or contaminated equipment. It can survive in infected plant debris and soil for at least nine months in the absence of a host. In fields that have been fumigated, disease outbreaks are attributed to the planting of infected nursery stock. Transplants that appear healthy may harbor quiescent infections that activate under favorable conditions, typically in warm, wet environments. Crown infections can lead to the wilting and death of entire plants during the early establishment of fruit production fields, especially where overhead irrigation is common. Major anthracnose crown rot outbreaks occurred in California nurseries during the 2000–01 and 2015–16 seasons, resulting in significant economic losses. For managing anthracnose crown rot, water wash or fungicide treatments of bare-root transplants are employed in nurseries or immediately before planting in production fields. Running water can remove soil from root and crown tissues, potentially eliminating inoculum, but does not control any existing infections. Preplant fungicide dips have been shown to decrease anthracnose crown rot, although only two products are currently registered for this purpose in the United States. The quinone outside inhibitor (QoI) azoxystrobin has been extensively used as a preplant dip and foliar treatment for anthracnose and other fungal diseases. However, resistance has been reported against this fungicide group in C. acutatum populations from strawberry in Florida. During the 2015–16 California nursery crown rot outbreak, growers observed reduced efficacy of azoxystrobin dips, suggesting possible resistance in California as well. A premixed product containing the anilinopyrimidine cyprodinil and the phenylpyrrole fludioxonil is also registered, but phytotoxicity and stunting of plants have been reported under certain environmental conditions or following off-label plant exposure. In addition to chemical treatments, heat treatment of transplants may reduce mortality from anthracnose, although this practice is not widely adopted as it can diminish plant vigor. In-season fungicide spray applications are common to prevent foliar and fruit infections, but these are ineffective against crown rot and root necrosis.
Natamycin, also known as pimaricin, is a natural polyene macrolide derived from the fermentation of Streptomyces spp. (i.e., Streptomyces natalensis, S. chattanoogensis, S. gilvosporeus, and S. lydicus) and has been used as an antifungal additive in the food industry since the 1960s. Currently, it is registered in the United States as a biopesticide for use on mushroom beds and, more recently, as a postharvest treatment for stone fruit and citrus. Due to its unique mode of action and the absence of reported resistance in filamentous fungi during extensive use in the food industry, this fungicide could be valuable in strawberry production, especially where QoI resistance has been reported in C. acutatum and new rotational products are needed for dip treatments. The purpose of this research was to evaluate new fungicides with potential registration for use as preplant dip treatments of bareroot strawberry transplants to manage anthracnose crown rot. The specific objectives were to (i) determine whether QoI resistance is present in C. acutatum populations in California and confirm this with molecular tools; (ii) establish in vitro sensitivity ranges of effective concentrations that inhibit mycelial growth or conidial germination by 50% (EC50) for selected new fungicides for both QoI-sensitive and -resistant isolates of C. acutatum; (iii) evaluate the efficacy of fungicide dip treatments on disease severity, plant mortality, and fruit yield; and (iv) assess the susceptibility of selected cultivars to disease.
Materials and Methods: Fungal isolates and culture methods. Seventy-four isolates of C. acutatum were obtained in 2015 and 2016 from commercial strawberry fields in Santa Barbara, San Luis Obispo, Ventura, Santa Cruz, Stanislaus, Tehama, San Joaquin, and Merced Counties of California. The transplant materials used to establish these fields were originally sourced from five independent nursery companies operating throughout the state. Crowns and petioles of symptomatic plants were sectioned into small pieces (10 mm³) using a scalpel, surface disinfected in 1% sodium hypochlorite for 2 minutes, triple-rinsed with sterile distilled water, and plated onto potato dextrose agar (PDA) acidified with 1 ml of 85% lactic acid per liter (APDA). Isolates were obtained from fruit lesions by touching a sterile cotton swab onto the lesion and then streaking the swab onto the surface of APDA plates.
Syngenta Crop Protection Inc. (Greensboro, NC), chlorothalonil (Bravo Weather Stick; Syngenta Crop Protection Inc.), cyprodinil (Vangard 75WG; Syngenta Crop Protection Inc.), fludioxonil (Scholar 50WP; Syngenta Crop Protection Inc.), and pydiflumetofen (experimental product A19649B; Syngenta Crop Protection Inc.) were used for in vitro sensitivity studies (Fig. 1). For plant treatments, these products were used individually or in mixtures of fludioxonil and cyprodinil (SwitchWG; Syngenta Crop Protection Inc.) or pydiflumetofen and fludioxonil (experimental product A20560C; Syngenta Crop Protection Inc.) (Fig. 2). Additionally, the biological control S. lydicus WYEC 108 (minimum of 10^3 CFU/g of formulated product; Actinovate AG; Valent U.S.A. LLC, Walnut Creek, CA) was included in field trials. Aqueous solutions were used in all studies.
Evaluation of in vitro sensitivity of fungicides: Fungicide sensitivities for all isolates of C. acutatum were determined using the spiral gradient dilution method (Förster et al. 2004). Briefly, an exponential concentration gradient for each fungicide was obtained by depositing appropriate stock concentrations radially onto 15-cm PDA plates using a spiral plater (Autoplate 4000; Spiral Biotech, Inc., Norwood, MA). For azoxystrobin, PDA was amended with salicylhydroxamic acid at 100 mg/ml. Stock concentrations were 1,000 mg/ml for natamycin, 100 or 5,000 mg/ml for azoxystrobin, 200 mg/ml for chlorothalonil, 50 mg/ml for cyprodinil, 20 mg/ml for fludioxonil, and 10,000 mg/ml for pydiflumetofen. Sterile water was applied to control plates. After 2 to 4 hours, 10 ml of each conidial suspension (5 × 10^5 spores/ml) was streaked radially from the outer edge toward the center of the plate using a sterile pestle. Each isolate was replicated on opposite sides of the plate, and four isolates were evaluated on each plate. Plates were incubated in the dark for 20 hours at 20°C for evaluation of conidial germination (azoxystrobin only) or for other tests.
Table 1 presents the collection details of C. acutatum isolates used in the study, which were gathered from various tissues (petiole, crown, fruit) and counties (Tehama and Ventura) across different dates, ranging from October 2015 to June 2016. The sensitivity of these isolates to fungicides is indicated as either sensitive (S) or resistant (R). T
Plant Disease /September 2018 1689 for 72 h at 25°C for evaluation of mycelial growth. EC50 values were determined as described previously (Förster et al. 2004). Each isolate was evaluated twice for each fungicide.
Molecular characterization of QoI resistance in C. acutatum. A subset of 5 QoI-sensitive and 11 QoI-resistant C. acutatum isolates were grown for 7 to 10 days on PDA. DNA was extracted from mycelia using the MPBio FastDNA kit. Polymerase chain reaction amplification was done using primers C. gramcytb-bf1 and C. gramcytb-br1 targeting the cytochrome b gene (cytb), according to Forcelini et al. (2016). Product amplification was confirmed by agarose (1%) gel electrophoresis in 0.5× Tris-borate-EDTA buffer. Amplicons were purified using ExoSap IT and sequenced at the Core Instrumentation Facility of the University of California Riverside Institute for Integrative Genome Biology. Sequences were aligned using BioEdit software.
Effect of preplant dip treatments on disease severity and plant mortality. Two trials were conducted using Portola and Fronteras (trial 1) or Monterey and Fronteras (trial 2) strawberry cultivars. Bareroot transplants were obtained from two nurseries and dipped for 4 min with agitation in aqueous conidial suspensions (10^6 conidia/ml) of a mixture of four each of QoI-sensitive or -resistant isolates of C. acutatum. Plants were stored at 20°C for 8 h to allow conidia to germinate and infect, and then up to 3 days at 5°C. Plants were then dipped in aqueous fungicide solutions for 4 min with agitation. Inoculated control plants were dipped in water or were left untreated. Excess solution was allowed to drain for approximately 2 min, and transplants were stored in plastic bags at 5°C overnight. Planting in the field was done on 4 March 2016 (trial 1) and 29 October 2016 (trial 2) at the University of California Riverside Agricultural Operations facility. The field area had been fallow for over 1 year and had not been planted with strawberry previously. No fumigation treatment was applied prior to planting. Plants were spaced 30 cm apart in double-row beds in a randomized complete block design. Each bed represented a block (replication) of plots, and there were four blocks each for plants inoculated with QoI-sensitive or -resistant isolates in each study. Each replication of treatments consisted of a plot of 10 plants of each cultivar.
A frequency distribution of effective concentrations to inhibit mycelial growth or spore germination of 74 isolates of Colletotrichum acutatum by 50% (EC50 values) was determined by the spiral gradient dilution method. The height of the bars represents the number of isolates within each bin, with bin widths calculated using Scott’s method. For determining bin width for azoxystrobin evaluations, only sensitive isolate values were considered.
Overhead irrigation was applied 3 days each week for 30 min each in the morning and afternoon for the first month, and drip irrigation was applied for 2 days each week for 2 h throughout the study. Fertilizer was applied through drip irrigation weekly or biweekly. No foliar fungicide or insecticide applications were made.
Plants were evaluated periodically for disease. Fungal isolations were performed from diseased tissues of 15 randomly selected symptomatic plants that were inoculated with QoI-sensitive or -resistant isolates to confirm that C. acutatum was the causal agent. Isolations from crown, leaf, and fruit tissues were conducted as described above, except that tissues were plated onto PDA amended with ampicillin (130 mg/ml) and rifampicin (20 mg/ml). Plants in the field were evaluated after 5 (trial 1) or 14 (trial 2) weeks for disease severity on aboveground growth using the following scale: 0 = healthy, vigorous plant; 1 = growth reduced; 2 = growth and vigor reduced, less than 50% the size of healthy plants; 3 = growth and vigor extremely reduced, less than 25% the size of healthy plants; and 4 = plant dead. Severity ratings were averaged for each 10-plant replication. The incidence of plant mortality was based on the number of dead plants (rating = 4) out of the 10 plants of each cultivar in each replication.
The effect of preplant dip treatments on fruit yield was evaluated using Fronteras. In trial 1, a single harvest of all mature red, commercially acceptable fruit for each treatment replication was conducted 10 weeks after planting, and the fruit were weighed. In trial 2, flowers and immature fruit were removed 7 and 12 weeks after planting, similar to commercial practices, to encourage vegetative growth during the winter period. All mature red, commercially acceptable fruit were harvested 20 and 23 weeks after planting, and the weights from the two harvests were combined for each treatment replication.
For in vitro fungicide toxicity experiments, variances were homogeneous for the two experiments according to Bartlett’s test, and data were combined for each isolate-fungicide combination. This data set was used to determine mean values. The effect of fungicide dip treatments on disease severity was evaluated in strawberry transplants inoculated with a mixture of four isolates of C. acutatum. Plants were assessed after 5 or 14 weeks for aboveground vegetative growth based on a rating scale from 0 to 4, where 0 indicates a healthy, vigorous plant, and 4 indicates a dead plant. Average disease severity was determined based on 10 plants for each of four replications in each experiment. Statistical analyses followed a factorial design with cultivar, inoculum type, and fungicide treatment as the main factors. When interactions between cultivar and inoculum type were significant, data were analyzed separately for each combination, with treatment as the single factor. Multiple comparisons for treatment means were conducted using appropriate statistical methods.
Fisher’s least significant difference test. All statistical procedures were conducted using SAS (version 9.4), with a significance value of α = 0.05.
Results
In vitro sensitivity of isolates of C. acutatum to fungicides. Of the 74 isolates tested, 29 were determined to be QoI resistant, with EC50 values for mycelial growth and conidial germination higher than 40 mg/ml. The remaining 45 isolates were QoI sensitive, with mean EC50 values for mycelial growth and germination inhibition of 0.034 mg/ml (range 0.015 to 0.064 mg/ml) and 0.129 mg/ml (range 0.060 to 0.267 mg/ml), respectively. Mean EC50 values for mycelial growth for all 74 isolates for chlorothalonil, cyprodinil, fludioxonil, and natamycin were 0.267 mg/ml (range 0.115 to 0.549 mg/ml), 0.025 mg/ml (range 0.012 to 0.390 mg/ml), 0.001 mg/ml (range 0.0006 to 0.0014 mg/ml), and 0.973 mg/ml (range 0.526 to 1.996 mg/ml), respectively. Sensitivity data are presented separately for QoI-sensitive and -resistant isolates. For azoxystrobin, a greater than 1,000× difference in sensitivity between sensitive and resistant groups was observed. No significant differences in sensitivity to cyprodinil (P = 0.3468), fludioxonil (P = 0.2556), and natamycin (P = 0.1010) were found for QoI-sensitive and -resistant isolates. For chlorothalonil, QoI-sensitive isolates were significantly less sensitive (mean EC50 value of 0.276 mg/ml) than QoI-resistant isolates (mean EC50 value of 0.250 mg/ml) (P = 0.0375). Pydiflumetofen was not inhibitory to mycelial growth at concentrations of up to 80 mg/ml tested. Frequency distributions of EC50 categories for each fungicide were shown in histograms. Distributions for all fungicides were unimodal, except for azoxystrobin, where a bimodal distribution was observed.
Molecular characterization of QoI resistance in C. acutatum. All 11 QoI-resistant isolates selected for cytb sequencing contained a single amino acid substitution from glycine (G) to alanine (A) at codon 143 (G143A mutation), resulting from a base pair substitution from guanine to cytosine. None of the QoI-sensitive isolates sequenced showed this mutation.
Effect of preplant dip treatments on disease severity and plant mortality. The overall models for severity and mortality disease measurements, as well as for the independent variables cultivar, type of inoculum (i.e., QoI-sensitive or -resistant isolates of C. acutatum), and treatment, were highly significant (P < 0.0001). There were significant interactions (P < 0.0001) between cultivar and treatment, as well as between type of inoculum and treatment, but not between cultivar and type of inoculum (P = 0.8133 and 0.0564 for severity and mortality, respectively). Due to these interactions, data were analyzed separately for each cultivar and inoculum type. In trial 1, Fronteras was significantly less susceptible to anthracnose crown rot (mean severity 1.4, mean mortality 24.9%) than Portola (mean severity 2.3, mean mortality 52.2%). Similarly, in trial 2
Disease severity and incidence of mortality of untreated, inoculated control plants were high at evaluation time, 5 weeks after spring planting of Portola or 14 weeks after fall planting of Monterey strawberry. After inoculation with QoI-sensitive isolates, disease severity was 3.5 and 3.2, and incidence of mortality was 85.0 and 69.1% for untreated Portola and Monterey controls, respectively. After inoculation with QoI-resistant isolates, these values were 4.0 and 3.4, and 100 and 74.6% for the two cultivars, respectively. In contrast, average disease severity and mortality for two studies with Fronteras planted in the spring or fall were 2.1 and 32.9%, respectively, for QoI-sensitive inoculum, and 2.5 and 47%, respectively, for QoI-resistant inoculum. Fungal isolations from diseased tissues of randomly selected symptomatic plants confirmed C. acutatum as the causal agent of disease symptoms. Water dip treatments of transplants were generally ineffective in reducing disease and mortality compared to the untreated control and only resulted in a significant (P < 0.05) reduction in disease severity for Monterey inoculated with QoI-resistant isolates of C. acutatum. Transplants of all three strawberry cultivars that were inoculated with QoI-sensitive or -resistant isolates and dip treated with natamycin at either rate or with the pydiflumetofen-fludioxonil or fludioxonil-cyprodinil premixtures showed significantly (P < 0.05) lower disease severity and plant mortality compared to the controls. Furthermore, there were generally no significant (P > 0.05) differences among these four treatments, and the new fungicides provided similar control to the registered premixture of fludioxonil and cyprodinil. Among the six cultivar–inoculum combinations, the 0.5 g/liter rate of natamycin was significantly (P > 0.05) less effective than the 1 g/liter rate only for Portola inoculated with QoI-resistant isolates. No stunting of plants or other signs of phytotoxicity were observed in any treatment in these trials. Treatments with azoxystrobin provided a high level of disease control when transplants were inoculated with QoI-sensitive isolates of the pathogen, and efficacy was similar to natamycin or the two premixtures containing fludioxonil. However, azoxystrobin was not effective when plants were treated with QoI-resistant isolates.
The table outlines the effective concentrations of various fungicides to inhibit mycelial growth or conidial germination of quinone outside inhibitor (QoI)-sensitive and -resistant isolates of Colletotrichum acutatum. The EC50 values, measured in mg/ml, indicate the concentrations required for 50% inhibition. For QoI-sensitive isolates, azoxystrobin showed a mean EC50 for mycelium of 0.034 and for conidia of 0.129. Chlorothalonil had a mean EC50 of 0.276 for mycelium, while cyprodinil and fludioxonil had lower values at 0.026 and 0.0009, respectively. Natamycin exhibited a higher mean EC50 of 0.996 for mycelium. For QoI-resistant isolates, chlorothalonil showed a mean of 0.250 for mycelium, while cyprodinil and fludioxonil had means of 0.025 and 0.0010, respectively. Both azoxystrobin and natamycin showed values greater than 40, indicating high resistance, and pydiflumetofen did not exhibit any inhibition at the highest
Inoculated with QoI-resistant isolates, there was no reduction in crown rot severity and plant mortality compared to the controls. Among the remaining treatments, chlorothalonil showed inconsistent performance. The fungicide significantly reduced disease severity compared to the untreated control in five of the six cultivar–inoculum combinations and plant mortality in four of the six combinations. Efficacy of chlorothalonil was often statistically lower than that of natamycin and the two premixed treatments containing fludioxonil. Pydiflumetofen was among the least effective treatments, significantly reducing disease severity from the untreated control only on Monterey using QoI-sensitive inoculum. The biocontrol agent S. lydicus was ineffective in all studies.
The effect of preplant dip treatments on fruit yield varied due to different harvest frequencies and timings for two trials conducted in different growing seasons with Fronteras. Yield data generally reflected the performance of the treatments in reducing disease severity and plant mortality. Water dip treatments did not increase yield compared to the untreated control, except in the first trial with QoI-sensitive inoculum. In both studies, natamycin treatments had yields statistically similar to those of the industry standard fludioxonil-cyprodinil or the experimental pydiflumetofen-fludioxonil premix. The yield of azoxystrobin-treated transplants was statistically higher than the untreated control and statistically similar to natamycin and fludioxonil-containing treatments in inoculations with QoI-sensitive isolates. However, after inoculation with QoI-resistant isolates, the yield for azoxystrobin was similar to the untreated control.
Fruit yields of the remaining treatments, including water control, S. lydicus, pydiflumetofen, and chlorothalonil, were not significantly different from the untreated control in trial 1. In trial 2, results were similar, but chlorothalonil and S. lydicus significantly increased yield from the untreated control for transplants inoculated with QoI-sensitive isolates. Still, natamycin at both rates, fludioxonil-containing treatments, and azoxystrobin (in inoculations with QoI-sensitive isolates) had the highest numerical yields among all treatments.
Discussion: Preplant dip treatments of strawberry transplants for managing anthracnose crown rot have relied on fludioxonil-cyprodinil and azoxystrobin since the early 2000s. Extensive use of these fungicides for pre- and post-plant disease management poses a high risk for resistance selection. Therefore, new preplant fungicide treatments are needed that have different modes of action from currently registered products. This study reports the distribution and genetic basis for QoI resistance in California populations.
C. acutatum, and we identify a new, highly effective preplant treatment, the biofungicide natamycin, which has a unique mode of action from all other fungicides registered on strawberries worldwide. QoI resistance was first described in C. acutatum from strawberries in Florida in 2013. G143A and F129L mutations in cytb were identified, conferring high and moderate resistance levels, respectively. In our study on California isolates, only the G143A mutation was detected, although only 11 resistant isolates were sequenced out of the total 29 isolates identified. Because all of our resistant isolates had EC50 values for azoxystrobin of >40 mg/ml, indicating high resistance, other resistance genotypes may not be present in California at this time. Diseased plants that yielded resistant isolates originated from two of five California nursery sources and were collected in three of eight counties sampled. Therefore, resistance currently may still be limited in distribution but could spread quickly with frequent movement of plant material. Population genetic analyses of isolates may provide information on whether resistance developed independently in the two nurseries and in Florida. Resistance can be managed by using treatments with different modes of action. The availability of alternative fungicides is important because resistance conferred by the G143A mutation characteristically cannot be mitigated using higher, off-label application rates of QoI compounds in the field. Additionally, this mutation has been shown to be stable in C. acutatum populations and does not result in a fitness penalty in laboratory assays. In our study, QoI-resistant and -sensitive isolates were similarly pathogenic, but disease severity and mortality after inoculation with resistant isolates were higher than for QoI-sensitive isolates. Several studies on other fungal pathogens have indicated that resistant isolates harboring the G143A mutation did not have reduced fitness compared to wild-type sensitive isolates. However, the fitness of resistant isolates of Magnaporthe oryzae was reduced. In vitro toxicities of chlorothalonil, cyprodinil, fludioxonil, and natamycin exhibited unimodal distributions of sensitivities. Although cyprodinil and fludioxonil have been used for many years in California strawberry production, no resistant isolates were detected in our samplings, and results reflect current sensitivity levels in C. acutatum populations in the sampling locations. A high in vitro activity of the fludioxonil-cyprodinil premix was previously determined for C. truncatum, with values in a range similar to our evaluation of the individual active ingredients. Because natamycin has never been used in commercial strawberry production, the EC50 values determined can be considered a baseline sensitivity to be used as a reference in future resistance monitoring.
Although in vitro toxicity of natamycin to C. acutatum was considerably lower than that of azoxystrobin (using sensitive isolates), fludioxonil, and cyprodinil, dip treatments of strawberry transplants with natamycin were highly effective and similar to those with azoxystrobin (when the disease was caused by QoI-sensitive isolates) or fludioxonil-cyprodinil. Chlorothalonil was inconsistent in reducing anthracnose crown rot and plant mortality in our studies. This confirms previous studies on strawberry anthracnose where chlorothalonil was not very effective. Fruit yields increased as disease severity and plant mortality decreased after treatment with fungicides that were effective against anthracnose crown rot. Yields overall were much lower in the first trial that was initiated in the spring because high temperatures that sporadically occur at the inland California field site in the spring caused plants to decline. The second trial, which was initiated in fall to winter and harvested in the spring, allowed time for greater plant growth. Additionally, flowers during early growth were removed to encourage vegetative growth, and two consecutive harvests were combined in the second study. For both spring- and fall-planted trials, the lack of foliar fungicide sprays that are standard in commercial field settings likely contributed to lower overall yield values. Treatments were evaluated as dips of transplants because planting material is a main source of introducing C. acutatum into a field, and currently, dip treatments of transplants are a common practice in California in the establishment of new strawberry fields. As shown in our results, plant mortality was reduced significantly by natamycin and fludioxonil-cyprodinil when transplants were inoculated with QoI-sensitive or -resistant isolates. Under highly favorable disease conditions, additional foliar treatments will have to be applied to protect plants from petiole and leaf lesions, as well as fruit rot throughout the season, and these can be integrated with those for management of gray mold caused by Botrytis spp. The experimental fungicide pydiflumetofen was not effective against C. acutatum in our in vitro and field studies. This fungicide, however, is very active against B. cinerea and has shown high efficacy in reducing powdery mildew of strawberry. The pydiflumetofen-fludioxonil premixture was among the most effective of our preplant dip treatments for crown rot of strawberry, but this was most likely due to the fludioxonil component. Therefore, this premixture has potential as a broad-spectrum postplant field fungicide for strawberry.
In the trials conducted, the effect of fungicide dip treatments on fruit yield of Fronteras strawberry transplants was assessed. For the first trial, mean fruit weights per replication showed significant variation across treatments. The untreated control yielded 23.9 grams for sensitive isolates and 81.2 grams for resistant isolates, while the water control had yields of 125.0 grams for sensitive isolates and 101.8 grams for resistant isolates. Treatments like Natamycin at both 0.5 and 1.0 grams/liter significantly increased yields for sensitive and resistant isolates, reaching up to 1,826.8 grams and 1,979.7 grams, respectively. Azoxystrobin yielded the highest weight for sensitive isolates at 378.1 grams but was less effective for resistant isolates, while fludioxonil-cyprodinil also demonstrated effectiveness, especially in resistant isolates. The overall data indicate that certain fungicides can substantially enhance fruit yield
Pydiflumetofen/fludioxonil 0.08/0.14 produced fruit weights of 243.1 b, 217.7 a, 2,325.2 a, and 1,921.3 a for the respective treatments. For each treatment, 10 plants were used for four replications for each inoculum mixture (isolates of Colletotrichum acutatum sensitive or resistant to quinone outside inhibitors). Fruit weight for trial 1 was determined in a single harvest approximately 10 weeks after planting, and for trial 2, in two combined harvests approximately 20 and 23 weeks after planting. Data were transformed using the equation y = log10(x + 1) and evaluated using analysis of variance and least significant difference mean separation procedures (P < 0.05). Mean values followed by the same letter within each column are not significantly different. Rates are based on active ingredient, except for S. lydicus, where the rate is based on formulated product.
Natamycin is classified as a biofungicide because it is a commercial fermentation product of S. natalensis. The dip application of transplants developed in this study led to its registration (as the product Zivion M; DSM) on strawberry, representing the first use of natamycin in field agriculture. Natamycin was previously registered for managing dry bubble disease of mushrooms caused by Verticillium fungicola var. fungicola and as a postharvest treatment for managing citrus and stone fruit decays caused by Monilinia, Penicillium, Geotrichum, and Botrytis species. Its unique mode of action involves direct binding to ergosterol, the primary sterol in fungi, disrupting membrane function and cellular transport. Unlike sterol biosynthesis- or demethylation-inhibiting fungicides, it does not inhibit ergosterol production. Consequently, in 2017, it was assigned its own Fungicide Resistance Action Committee Code, Number 48. Natamycin is designated as a biopesticide by the United States Environmental Protection Agency and is exempt from pesticide tolerances in the United States, being “generally recognized as safe” by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. The registration of natamycin is crucial for the strawberry industry because, after many years of use in the food industry, resistance in filamentous fungi has not been reported.
Acknowledgments: We thank W. D. Gubler for assisting in obtaining plant material, D. Murillo and G. Gemelga for their technical assistance with data collection and laboratory assays, and the laboratory personnel who assisted in field planting. This research is part of a Ph.D. dissertation undertaken by S. E. Haack.
Literature Cited: Adaskaveg, J. E., and Hartin, R. J. Characterization of Colletotrichum acutatum isolates causing anthracnose of almond and peach in California. Phytopathology 87:979-987. Aparicio, J. F., Barreales, E. G., Payero, T. D., Vicente, C. M., de Pedro, A., and Santos-Aberturas, J. Biotechnological production and application of the antibiotic pimaricin: Biosynthesis and its regulation. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 100:61-78. Bartlett, D. W., Clough, J. M., Godwin, J. R., Hall, A. A., Hamer, M., and Parr Dobrzanski, B. The strobilurin fungicides. Pest Manage. Sci. 58:649-662. Chen, D., Förster, H., and Adaskaveg, J. Pimaricin: A new post-harvest fungicide for selected citrus, stone, and pome fruit
Occurrence of QoI resistance and detection of the G143A mutation in Michigan populations of Venturia inaequalis. Plant Dis. 95:927-934. Lu, C. G., Liu, W. C., Qiu, J. Y., Wang, H. M., Liu, T., and De Liu, W. 2008. Identification of an antifungal metabolite produced by a potential biocontrol Actinomyces strain A01. Braz. J. Microbiol. 39:701-707. Ma, B., and Uddin, W. 2009. Fitness and competitive ability of an azoxystrobin resistant G143A mutant of Magnaporthe oryzae from perennial ryegrass. Plant Dis. 93:1044-1049. MacKenzie, S. J., and Peres, N. A. 2012. Use of leaf wetness and temperature to time fungicide applications to control anthracnose fruit rot of strawberry in Florida. Plant Dis. 96:522-528. Rallos, L. E. E., Johnson, N. G., Schmale, D. G., III, Prussin, A. J., II, and Baudoin, A. B. 2014. Fitness of Erysiphe necator with G143A-based resistance to quinone outside inhibitors. Plant Dis. 98:1494-1502. Scott, D. W. 1979. On optimal and data-based histograms. Biometrika 66:605-610. Smith, B. J. 1998. Anthracnose crown rot. Pages 46-48 in: Compendium of Strawberry Diseases, second ed. J. L. Maas, ed. American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN. Smith, B. J. 2008. Epidemiology and pathology of strawberry anthracnose: A North American perspective. HortScience 43:69-73. Smith, B. J., and Black, L. L. 1990. Morphological, cultural, and pathogenic variation among Colletotrichum species isolated from strawberry. Plant Dis. 74:69-76. Sreenivasaprasad, S., Sharada, K., Brown, A. E., and Mills, P. R. 1996. PCR-based detection of Colletotrichum acutatum on strawberry. Plant Pathol. 45:650-655. Torres-Calzada, C., Tapia-Tussell, R., Higuera-Ciapara, I., Martin-Mex, R., Nexticapan-Garcez, A., and Perez-Brito, D. 2015. Sensitivity of Colletotrichum truncatum to four fungicides and characterization of thiabendazole-resistant isolates. Plant Dis. 99:1590-1595. Turechek, W. W., Peres, N. A., and Werner, N. A. 2006. Pre- and post-infection activity of pyraclostrobin for control of anthracnose fruit rot of strawberry caused by Colletotrichum acutatum. Plant Dis. 90:862-868. Weir, B. S., Johnston, P. R., and Damm, U. 2012. The Colletotrichum gloeosporioides species complex. Stud. Mycol. 73:115-180.
