Survival of Colletotrichum acutatum in Soil and Plant Debris of Leatherleaf Fern
Plant Disease / October 1997
Survival of Colletotrichum acutatum in Soil and Plant Debris of Leatherleaf Fern
D. J. Norman and J. O. Strandberg, Plant Pathology Department, University of Florida, IFAS, Central Florida Research and Education Center, 2807 Binion Rd., Apopka 32703
Leatherleaf fern (Rumohra adiantiformis (G. Forster) Ching) is the largest cut foliage crop in the United States; the estimated 1993 wholesale value was $70 million. Leatherleaf fern fronds are used in floral arrangements, with most being used domestically in North America, while about 25% are shipped to Europe and Japan. Approximately 2,860 hectares of leatherleaf fern are grown in Florida, with smaller amounts cultivated in California, Hawaii, Georgia, Louisiana, and Texas. As a perennial crop, production occurs throughout the year, with ferns grown under 73% shade cloth or oak trees. Fungal diseases caused by Cylindrocladium, Pythium, and Rhizoctonia species can affect leatherleaf fern, but fungicides can control these diseases and minimize losses. A new disease of leatherleaf fern, known as fern anthracnose, first appeared in Florida in 1993. A similar disease was reported earlier in Costa Rica. The fungal pathogen has been identified as a pathotype of Colletotrichum acutatum J.H. Simmonds, which has also been described as a pathogen of strawberry, citrus, flowering dogwood, peach, apple, pecan, and black gum. On leatherleaf fern, C. acutatum infects young, immature fronds, resulting in black necrosis and deformation of leaflets, rendering all infected fronds unmarketable. Severely infected fern plantings appear burned due to extensive black necrosis on the leaves. Production losses attributed to C. acutatum have approached 100% in some ferneries. Since its emergence in 1993, the pathogen has spread rapidly, and as of December 1994, five counties in Florida reported the occurrence of the pathogen in their ferneries. It is estimated that half of the land used for leatherleaf production has been infested. The ecology and survival of other Colletotrichum species in soil have been studied; however, due to the novelty of the disease caused by C. acutatum on leatherleaf fern in Florida, no substantial research has been completed on the ecology of this organism and its relationship to leatherleaf fern. Our study aimed to determine the potential for survival of C. acutatum in soil and plant debris within leatherleaf ferneries and the ability of surviving inoculum to incite
Semiselective medium. Naturally occurring populations of fungi and bacteria in soil make studies of specific organisms found in low numbers especially difficult. To develop a semiselective medium that could be used both with controlled environments and field samples, a selective marker was needed. The fungicide benomyl had previously been used extensively in leatherleaf fern production and did not control fern anthracnose. Thus, C. acutatum was expected to be tolerant to it. Induced resistance to benomyl is thought to arise from a single gene mutation and is easily induced and stable. However, resistance of C. acutatum to benomyl is considered by some to be natural and not the result of selection pressure. Benomyl has been included in semiselective media developed in other studies for isolation of Colletotrichum spp. from soil. Tolerance of C. acutatum isolates from leatherleaf fern to benomyl was evaluated according to the radial growth of fungal colonies and conidial germination on benomyl-amended PDA. Radial growth of four isolates from four ferneries was measured on PDA and PDA amended with 5, 50, 100, 500, and 1,000 µg of benomyl per ml. Three plugs from a 2-day-old culture growing on PDA were removed with a 4-mm cork borer and placed equidistant on 9-cm-diameter petri plates containing 20 ml of media; two replicate plates were used for each treatment. Plates were incubated under Gro-Lux fluorescent lights with a 12-hour day/night cycle. Radial growth of the six colonies in each treatment was measured daily for 5 days. Treatment means were compared with Tukey’s least significant difference (LSD) test.
ABSTRACT: Norman, D. J., and Strandberg, J. O. 1997. Survival of Colletotrichum acutatum in soil and plant debris of leatherleaf fern. Plant Dis. 81:1177-1180. Leatherleaf fern anthracnose is incited by a new pathotype of Colletotrichum acutatum. Fern anthracnose appeared in Florida in 1993, has spread rapidly, and produces losses that approach 100% in some ferneries. To help develop recommendations for control and management of fern anthracnose, the survival of the pathogen in soil and diseased plant material and on clothing was investigated in laboratory and field experiments. Survival of conidia, sclerotia, and conidia in infected leaf debris was studied in soil maintained at five moisture levels. Survival of conidia and sclerotia declined rapidly under moist conditions (≥12% moisture, vol/wt), but under dry conditions, viable conidia could be detected up to 12 months after incorporation into soil. Similar results were obtained in field experiments in which infected leaf debris was buried in soil. Viable conidia were recovered for up to 3 months in leaf debris stored under laboratory conditions. Conidia applied to denim fabric were recovered up to 5 weeks after application. This indicated that contaminated
The effect of benomyl on the germination of conidia of C. acutatum was examined on 10 isolates obtained from 10 separate fernery locations. Conidial suspensions (1 × 10^5 conidia per ml) from 48-hour-old PDA cultures were spread on 9-cm-diameter Petri plates containing 20 ml of PDA or PDA amended with 1,000 µg of benomyl per ml. Cultures were incubated as described previously. After 20 hours, 300 conidia were examined under magnification, and the percent germination was determined. This experiment was repeated three times. Means were compared using Tukey’s LSD test. Based on observable inhibition of competitive soil fungi, a concentration of 50 µg of benomyl per ml was selected for all subsequent soil assays and field work. Chlortetracycline (100 µg/ml) was added to limit bacterial growth. When C. acutatum was grown on this semiselective medium under fluorescent lights, colonies turned a bright salmon orange and were easily identifiable.
Survival of C. acutatum in soil and plant debris was assessed using sandy soil (pH 6.9) collected from a fernery that was not infested with C. acutatum. The soil was air-dried and sieved through a screen with a 1.7-mm opening to remove large organic particles. Sieved, air-dried soil (100 g) was placed in plastic Magenta vessels (7.2 × 7.2 × 9.6 cm) with plastic lids. To simulate field conditions, five soil moisture contents ranging from air-dried to water-saturated were examined. Conidia of C. acutatum isolate 95-39 (previously used in benomyl sensitivity testing) were harvested from 48-hour-old PDA cultures and suspended in sterile distilled water (SDW). Concentrations were adjusted using a hemacytometer to 8.5 × 10^6 conidia per ml. A 1 ml spore suspension was added to vessels containing 100 g of soil and mixed by hand. Soil moistures were adjusted with SDW to the desired levels. The soil was hydrated to 1, 3, 6, 12 (–2.5 kPa), or 24% moisture content based on oven-dry weights. The vessels were sealed and placed in an incubator at 25°C. SDW was added as needed to maintain a constant level of soil moisture. Each treatment was replicated three times, and each experiment was repeated at least once. For assay, 1-g soil subsamples were removed at weekly intervals for 8 weeks, then at 3-week intervals until viable conidia were no longer detected. Each subsample was suspended in 10 ml of SDW, mixed, diluted to appropriate concentrations, and 0.5 ml of the dilution was spread on plates of semiselective media. Cultures were incubated as previously described, and salmon-orange colonies were counted after 72 hours of growth. To confirm that colonies observed on selective media were C. acutatum and that they maintained pathogenicity, 10 colonies (2 from each soil moisture treatment) were selected from subsamples taken 29 weeks after incorporating spore suspensions into soil. These isolates were pu
To study the survival of sclerotia in soil, we spread 0.5 ml of conidial suspension (1 × 10^6 conidia per ml) on 9-cm-diameter acidified PDA plates (PDA supplemented with lactic acid at 0.25 ml/liter). Plates were incubated for 1 month under previously described conditions, and the contents of 18 plates were ground in a blender with 300 ml of sterile distilled water (SDW). The agar-fungal mixture was rinsed through soil sieves with 250- and 90-µm openings. Sclerotia trapped in the smaller sieve were repeatedly washed with distilled water until no conidia could be observed in the rinsate under microscopic examination. Sclerotia were centrifuged at 5,000 rpm (9,000 × g) for 10 minutes, and the liquid-agar supernatant was decanted. Aliquots of the sclerotium pellet (0.5 g) were added to 100 g of sieved fern soil in Magenta vessels (calculated as 6 × 10^3 sclerotia per g of soil). Treatments were replicated three times, and samples were plated on amended PDA and evaluated as previously described.
To compare controlled-environment results with the survival of Colletotrichum acutatum in the field, three small shade structures (1 × 1 m, 70% shade) were constructed in an open field. Overhead irrigation was supplied to maintain moisture levels above 4% soil moisture, as suggested for fern production. Tensiometers connected to a data logger were used to monitor soil moisture at a depth of 3 cm. Infected fern fronds were chopped as described previously, and 1-g samples were placed in 2.5 × 5-cm nylon mesh bags. Thirteen bags were buried 3 cm deep in each shade structure. Bags were recovered from each structure at 7-day intervals for 4 weeks and thereafter every 3 weeks until C. acutatum could not be detected. Samples were processed and evaluated as previously described. This study was conducted from July through November, when air temperatures ranged from 37 to 2°C, respectively.
Survival of C. acutatum conidia on clothing showed that concentrations as high as 270 viable conidia per cm² of denim fabric were recovered from fern harvesters during a 5-hour harvesting period. To test the ability of these C. acutatum conidia to survive on clothing, a spore suspension of 1 × 10^6 conidia per ml was sprayed on cotton denim fabric. The fabric was air-dried, cut into 1-cm² sections, and stored in vessels at 25°C. Once weekly, three 1-cm² sections of cloth were removed, placed in SDW, and the numbers of surviving spores were determined on the semiselective medium. This experiment was repeated three times.
Infectivity tests showed that at inoculum levels ≥1 × 10^6 conidia per ml, all inoculated fern plants developed symptoms within 7 days. Below this concentration, an approximately linear decrease in disease incidence was observed at levels down to 100 conidia per ml. No infections were observed when concentrations of conidia in the inoculum were below 100 conidia per ml.
PDA (11.31 ± 0.36 mm). No significant differences in conidia germination were observed between PDA and benomyl amended PDA (1,000 µg/ml) (99.50 ± 0.62% and 99.50 ± 0.43%, respectively).
Survival of C. acutatum in soil and leaf debris. Populations of C. acutatum conidia recovered from laboratory soil tests decreased steadily, especially under moist or saturated conditions. Within 1 week, detectable populations decreased by more than 30% for all treatments; within 4 weeks, numbers of viable conidia fell below 100 conidia per g of soil with soil moistures ≥6% (we assumed that conidia were the CFU recovered). However, under dry conditions (1%), it took 105 days for populations to fall below 100 conidia per g of soil, but lower numbers of conidia could be recovered for up to 12 months. All re-isolates of C. acutatum from soil maintained their pathogenicity toward leather leaf fern and formed lesions within 2 weeks of inoculation. When infected leaf debris was added to soil and incubated under controlled environmental conditions, concentrations of detectable conidia increased during the first week, except under very moist conditions. However, long-term survival at various soil moistures followed a pattern similar to that observed for conidia directly added to soil. Nevertheless, the rate of decline was slightly less for soil-incorporated leaf debris: it required between 5 to 6 weeks for detectable populations to fall below 100 conidia per g for soil moistures of 3% and greater. Within dry soil (1%), conidia associated with leaf debris maintained viability at levels above 100 conidia per g for 31 weeks. Similar rates of decline in viable conidia were also observed when leaf debris without soil was stored in plastic containers under dry or moist conditions.
Survival of C. acutatum in leaf debris buried outdoors in soil was similar to that in a controlled environment, in that initial populations increased within the first week and then steadily decreased over a 5-month period. Viable conidia were detected from leaf debris samples until 126 days after incorporation in soil; however, the assumed inoculation threshold (100 conidia per g of soil) was reached within 80 days after incorporation. Sclerotia of C. acutatum added to soil held under laboratory conditions maintained high viability (≥100 sclerotia per g of soil) under dry conditions for 26 weeks; however, under moist conditions (≥12%), populations declined to very low levels by day 56. Viable sclerotia at lower numbers were recovered consistently
The number of conidia necessary for infection of leatherleaf fern under ideal conditions was determined to be approximately 100 CFU/ml in inoculum suspensions applied to fern leaves. With an estimate of the effective inoculum threshold needed for fern anthracnose and knowledge of initial conidia populations present, the survival rate of the pathogen in soil or leaf debris can be better estimated. These estimates are important for formulating disease management strategies and cultural controls. Colletotrichum acutatum infects only immature fronds from the time they break the soil until they fully expand and mature; this interval ranges from 7 to 14 days depending on weather conditions. Acervuli can form on infected fronds within 3 to 4 days of infection, and conidia are washed or fall onto newly emerging fronds or onto soil. Once the disease is introduced into a production facility, the fungal life cycle becomes continuous, and subsequent disease losses can be extensive. The survival of conidia in soil and plant debris is important for formulating disease management strategies, including decontamination of equipment and cultural control methods. When left for an extended time on PDA, C. acutatum produces sclerotia, which are especially common at acidic pH. The role, if any, that sclerotia play in the survival of this fungus under normal field conditions is unknown, as sclerotia have only been observed under laboratory conditions.
Researchers monitored the survival of C. acutatum in strawberry tissue over a 7-week period at three temperatures (11, 25, and 40°C) and three soil moisture levels (flooded, moist [10.6%], and air dry). Recovery of C. acutatum from infected tissue declined rapidly under flooded soil conditions with soil temperatures of 25°C or higher, whereas recovery from tissue samples was 100% after 7 weeks at 10 and 25°C. Similar results were obtained in our study for the survival of conidia, sclerotia, or conidia in infected leatherleaf fern debris under high and low soil moistures. Fern harvesting occurs throughout the year and in all types of weather, including rainfall. Harvesters are contracted to work in different ferneries and may harvest in multiple fields and farms within the same day. Transport of conidia on clothing, tools, and equipment is thought to be a major mechanism by which the fungus has spread rapidly within and between ferneries. Wet clothing can easily adsorb hydrophilic spores that are later transferred onto the surfaces of susceptible leaves. Our results demonstrate that conidia can also persist on clothing for periods that provide excellent potential for long-distance transport and introduction into uninfested ferneries.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research was supported in part by the Fred C. Gloeckner Foundation Inc. and the Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services.
LITERATURE CITED
Colletotrichum acutatum in soil. Plant Dis. 74:161-163. Eastburn, D. M., and Gubler, W. D. 1992. Effect of soil moisture and temperature on the survival of Colletotrichum acutatum. Plant Dis. 76:841-842. Farley, J. D. 1972. A selective medium for assay of Colletotrichum coccodes in soil. Phytopathology 62:1288-1293. Hastie, A. C., and Georgopoulos, S. G. 1971. Mutational resistance to fungitoxic benzimidazole derivatives in Aspergillus nidulans. J. Gen. Microbiol. 67:371-373. Henz, G. P., Boiteux, L. S., and Lopes, C. A. 1992. Outbreak of strawberry anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum acutatum in central Brazil. Plant Dis. 76:212. Khan, M., and Sinclair, J. B. 1991. Effect of soil temperature on infection of soybean roots by sclerotia-forming isolates of Colletotrichum truncatum. Plant Dis. 75:282-285. Nair, J., Newhook, F. J., and Corbin, J. B. 1983. Survival of Colletotrichum acutatum f. sp. pinea in soil and pine debris. Trans. Br. Mycol. Soc. 81:53-63. Stamps, R. H. 1992. Commercial leatherleaf fern culture in the United States of America. Pages 243-249 in: Fern Horticulture: Past, Present and Future Perspectives. Proc. Int. Symp. Cultivation Propagation Pteridophytes. Intercept Ltd., Andover, England. Strandberg, J. O. 1994. Efficacy of selected fungicides for control of anthracnose in leatherleaf fern—A preliminary report. Univ. Fla. Inst. Food Agric. Sci. Central Fla. Res. Edu. Center. Cut Foliage Grower 9(11/12):1-4. Strandberg, J. O., Stamps, R. H., and Norman, D. J. 1996. Fern anthracnose: A guide for effective disease management. Univ. Fla., Agric. Exp. Stn. Tech. Bull. 900. Tu, J. C. 1983. Epidemiology of anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum lindemuthianum on white bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) in southern Ontario: Survival of the pathogen. Plant Dis. 67:402-404. U.S. Department of Agriculture. 1993. Floriculture crops, summary. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Statistics Service, Agricultural Statistics Board, Washington, DC
