Total Nitrogen Determination for Plant Material Containing Nitrate
E. F. Eastin
Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Route 5, Box 784, Beaumont, Texas 77706
A nonfoaming method for semimicro Kjeldahl determination of total nitrogen in plant samples containing appreciable amounts of nitrate was developed for use with a digestion block utilizing test tubes as digestion flasks. The sample (30 to 200 mg) is treated with 5 ml of a sulfuric acid
acid (30:1 v/w) mixture at room temperature for 1 hour. Catalyst [K2SO4
·2H2O
(970:19:11 w/w/w)] is added, and the mixture is digested at 360 to 380°C for 1 hour after the mixture clears. Ammonium in the digest is determined by a suitable method. This semimicro Kjeldahl procedure results in a 95% or better recovery of nitrate, either from KNO3 or from KNO3 added to plant material.
In conducting experiments where large numbers of samples are analyzed for total nitrogen, the standard equipment and procedure are costly, require significant laboratory space, and are labor-intensive. A 160-sample digestion apparatus utilizing test tubes and an AutoAnalyzer method for ammonium determination have been developed for use with samples containing little or no nitrate. This report describes a semimicro method which determines total nitrogen in plant material containing appreciable amounts of nitrate using a tube digestion apparatus without excessive foaming.
Materials and Methods
Milled rice (var. Labelle), soybean seed (var. Davis), wheat grain (var. Milam), and leaf material from three-leaf corn (var. Texas 28A), two-leaf cotton (var. Stoneville 213), one-leaf cucumber (var. Ashley), three-leaf peanut (var. Starr), three-leaf rice, two-leaf sorghum (var. NK233), three-leaf soybean, three-leaf wheat, and potassium nitrate were analyzed. All plant samples were dried in an oven at 65°C and ground in a Wiley mill to pass a 30-mesh screen. Dried samples were stored in a desiccator until analyzed.
For plant material containing little or no nitrate, a standard semimicro Kjeldahl method is used. For samples containing high nitrate concentrations, the following modified method is employed. Place 30 to 200 mg (depending upon plant material) of dried, ground plant material in a 50-ml graduated Folin-Wu digestion tube. Add 5 ml of a sulfuric acid
acid (30:1 v/w) mixture, cover, and allow to stand at room temperature for at least 1 hour. Add approximately 1 g of Se1 Dahl digestion mix [K2SO4
·2H2O
(970:19:11 w/w/w)]. Place the tubes on a digestion block preheated to approximately 200°C and digest at 380°C for 1 hour after the digest clears to ensure complete digestion. After cooling, bring the digest to 50 ml with deionized (nitrogen-free) water. Mix the contents of each tube and transfer approximately 3 ml to a sampling cup for storage in a refrigerator until analyzed for ammonium. To determine if a pretreatment was necessary, samples were weighed and placed in the digestion tubes; the sulfuric acid
acid mixture was added, and four random tubes were taken at intervals for addition of catalyst and digestion.
Total Nitrogen Determination for Plant Material Containing Nitrate
E. F. Eastin
Texas Agricultural Experiment Station, Beaumont, Texas
Received July 18, 1977; accepted October 31, 1977
A nonfoaming method for the semimicro Kjeldahl determination of total nitrogen in plant samples containing appreciable amounts of nitrate was developed for use with a digestion block that utilizes test tubes for digestion flasks. The sample (30 to 200 mg) is treated with 5 ml of a sulfuric acid
acid (30:1 v/w) mixture at room temperature for 1 hour. Catalyst (K₂SO₄
₂·2H₂O
970:19:11 w/w/w) is added, and the mixture is digested at 360 to 380°C for 1 hour after the mixture clears. Ammonium in the digest is determined by a suitable method. This semimicro Kjeldahl procedure results in a recovery of 95% or better of nitrate, either from KNO₃ or from KNO₃ added to plant material.
In experiments analyzing large numbers of samples for total nitrogen, standard equipment and procedures are costly, require significant laboratory space, and are labor-intensive. A 160-sample digestion apparatus utilizing test tubes and an AutoAnalyzer method for ammonium determination have been developed for samples containing little or no nitrate. This report describes a semimicro method that determines total nitrogen in plant material with appreciable amounts of nitrate using a tube digestion apparatus without excessive foaming.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Milled rice (var. Labelle), soybean seed (var. Davis), wheat grain (var. Milam), and leaf material from three-leaf corn (var. Texas 28A), two-leaf cotton (var. Stoneville 213), one-leaf cucumber (var. Ashley), three-leaf peanut (var. Starr), three-leaf rice, two-leaf sorghum (var. NK233), three-leaf soybean, three-leaf wheat, and potassium nitrate were analyzed. All plant samples were dried in an oven at 65°C and ground in a Wiley mill to pass a 30-mesh screen. Dried samples were stored in a desiccator until analyzed.
For plant material containing little or no nitrate, a standard semimicro Kjeldahl method is used. For samples with high nitrate concentrations, the following modified method is applied: Place 30 to 200 mg (depending on plant material) of dried, ground plant material in a 50-ml graduated Folin-Wu digestion tube. Add 5 ml of a sulfuric acid
acid (30:1 v/w) mixture, cover, and allow to stand at room temperature for at least 1 hour. Add approximately 1 g of Se1 Dahl digestion mix (Scientific Products) (K₂SO₄
₂·2H₂O
(970:19:11 w/w/w)). Place the tubes on a digestion block preheated to approximately 200°C and digest at 380°C for 1 hour after the digest clears to ensure complete digestion. After cooling, bring the digest to 50 ml with deionized (nitrogen-free) water. Mix the contents of each tube and transfer approximately 3 ml to a sampling cup for storage in a refrigerator until analyzed for ammonium with the AutoAnalyzer. To determine if a pretreatment was necessary, samples were weighed and placed in the digestion tubes; the sulfuric acid
acid mixture was added, and four random tubes were taken at intervals for the addition of catalyst and digestion.
What specific aspects of the article are you looking to focus on or revise further?
Method A is a technique for determining total nitrogen in samples that contain little or no nitrate nitrogen. However, the recovery of nitrate nitrogen from potassium nitrate (KNO₃) is only 43.90 ± 3.39%. Nelson and Sommers reported that a similar method recovered 16% to 55% of the added nitrate. Several methods have been developed for nitrate-containing samples; however, these methods either produce excessive foaming during the digestion of multiple samples in tubes or are too labor-intensive for routine use. Nelson and Sommers propose a sulfuric acid and salicylic acid pretreatment for 2 hours, followed by the addition of sodium sulfite and gentle heating until foaming ceases. After cooling, the catalyst is added, and the sample is digested. The addition of sodium sulfite can lead to excessive foaming and loss of the sample if extreme care is not taken.
Method B, which uses a sulfuric acid and salicylic acid mixture along with a catalyst (without sodium sulfite treatment), was developed to eliminate foaming and to quantitatively recover nitrate nitrogen. A pretreatment with the sulfuric acid and salicylic acid mixture is necessary for the complete recovery of nitrate nitrogen from KNO₃. A pretreatment time of 0.5 hours or longer yields at least 95% recovery of nitrate nitrogen. For routine use, we pretreat for at least 1 hour before adding the catalyst.
The recovery of nitrate nitrogen using Method B from KNO₃ and when KNO₃ is added to various plant materials showed that recovery from KNO₃ was 99.89 ± 0.63%. Recovery of added nitrate nitrogen from plant tissue ranged from 96.16 ± 1.36% for peanut leaf material to 100.00 ± 3.39% for cucumber leaf material. This method requires more time than the standard Kjeldahl method but quantitatively recovers nitrate nitrogen, which the standard method does not. Other methods that recover nitrate nitrogen are not suitable for tube digestion due to the extreme care needed to prevent foaming and sample loss. This method is relatively rapid, easy, and quantitatively recovers nitrate nitrogen from a variety of plant tissues. It should also be effective in recovering nitrate from soil.
Acknowledgments: This research was partially supported by The Texas Rice Improvement Association. The author also acknowledges M. R. Billodeaux for his technical assistance.
Sure, please provide the contents you'd like me to revise.
