Authors: Cai, L., Hyde, K.D., Taylor, P.W.J., Weir, B.S., Waller, J.M., Abang, M.M., Zhang, J.Z., Yang, Y.L., Phoulivong, S., Liu, Z.Y., Prihastuti, H., Shivas, R.G., McKenzie, E.H.C., Johnston, P.R.
Citation: Cai, L., Hyde, K.D., Taylor, P.W.J., Weir, B.S., Waller, J., Abang, M.M., Zhang, J.Z., Yang, Y.L., Phoulivong, S., Liu, Z.Y., Prihastuti, H., Shivas, R.G., McKenzie, E.H.C., Johnston, P.R. (2009). A polyphasic approach for studying Colletotrichum. Fungal Diversity, 39: 183-204.
Note: This publication was uploaded by Bevan Simon Weir on May 22, 2014. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
Colletotrichum Corda is one of the most economically important genera of fungi, responsible for anthracnose and other diseases affecting a wide range of plant species (Sutton, 1980; Hyde et al., 2009). The need for species recognition is therefore a significant practical concern in the taxonomy of Colletotrichum species (Shenoy et al., 2007). However, considerable difficulties have arisen in Colletotrichum systematics due to the lack of reliable morphological features, which makes species boundaries ambiguous and confusing. Traditionally, many Colletotrichum species have been named after their host, suggesting host specificity among species.
In a drastic move, von Arx (1957) reduced the number of recognized Colletotrichum species from several hundred to 11 based on morphological characteristics, with many taxa treated as synonyms of C. gloeosporioides and C. dematium. Several additional species have since been accepted based on morphological criteria (Sutton, 1980; 1992). The difficulties in recognizing Colletotrichum species can be attributed to: 1) the limited and variable morphological characters; 2) an extensive host range and variability in pathogenicity (Bailey and Jeger, 1992; Freeman et al., 2000; Latunde-Dada, 2001; Du et al., 2005; Thaung, 2008); 3) type specimens that are often missing or in poor condition, making them unsuitable for molecular studies; and 4) numerous rDNA ITS sequences of Colletotrichum strains in NCBI that are often misidentified (Crouch et al., 2009d; Damm et al., 2009).
To address the issue of limited morphologically informative characters, researchers have employed other traits such as nucleic acid sequence data, physiology, secondary metabolites, and pathogenicity as part of a polyphasic approach (Sutton, 1992; Cannon et al., 2000; Than et al., 2008a,b; Crouch et al., 2009b; Prihastuti et al., 2009). Phylogenetic analysis based on nucleic acid sequences has been successfully utilized to differentiate species in other difficult genera (e.g., Fusarium—Shenoy et al., 2007; Kvas et al., 2009; O’Donnell et al., 2009; Botryosphaeriaceae—Slippers et al., 2004a,b; Crous et al., 2006; Alves et al., 2006, 2008; Phillips et al., 2007), although it has been less successful in other groups (e.g., Pestalotiopsis—Jeewon et al., 2002, 2003; Lee et al., 2006; Hu et al., 2007; Tesjevi et al., 2007). Such data are particularly important for species differentiation and understanding species relationships in Colletotrichum.
The taxonomy of Colletotrichum is currently unsatisfactory, highlighting the pressing need for a polyphasic approach to identification that accurately reflects the natural classification of species and subspecific taxa within the genus (Sutton, 1992; Cannon et al., 2000). This paper proposes a taxonomic framework for describing Colletotrichum epitypes and new species. This framework utilizes a multi-gene phylogeny based on type specimens, along with well-defined phylogenetic lineages that correlate with recognizable polyphasic characters such as morphology, cultural characteristics, physiology, and pathogenicity. The paper discusses various approaches that have been used or could be incorporated in the study of Colletotrichum species, including recommended methodologies and a discussion on the correlation of characters with phylogenetic types. A phylogenetic analysis based on the internal transcribed spacers and the 5.8S ribosomal RNA gene (ITS) from specimens, including 42 ex-type strains, is also provided (Fig. 1).
Traditional identification systems in Colletotrichum have heavily relied on morphological and cultural characteristics (von Arx, 1957; Sutton, 1980, 1992; Bailey and Jeger, 1992; Freeman et al., 1998). Sutton (1992) noted that morphology alone does not provide sufficient information for precise identification, especially for species within the C. gloeosporioides and C. dematium complexes. Crouch et al. (2009b) argued that conidial size and shape, along with conidial appressoria, were taxonomically uninformative and of limited use for species diagnosis in graminicolous Colletotrichum species. Species with similar morphological characteristics may exhibit considerable variation at the physiological and pathogenic levels, making this recognition crucial for biosecurity, plant breeding, and integrated disease management. Taxonomy based solely on morphology is likely to result in ambiguity. Recent studies have shown that morphological characters should be used in conjunction with other characters to establish species relationships within Colletotrichum (Crouch et al., 2009b; Prihastuti et al., 2009).
Available morphological characters of Colletotrichum species include: 1) characters on natural substrates, such as size and shape of conidiomata (acervuli), conidia, conidiophores, and setae; 2) size and shape of conidia, conidiophores, and setae in culture; and 3) size and shape of appressoria. Acervuli, setae, and conidial characters (shape and dimensions) on natural substrates can vary due to environmental factors, and conidia may be absent from infected host tissues. Some Colletotrichum species, such as C. musae and C. gossypii, consistently fail to produce setae in conidiomata (Sutton and Waterston, 1970), and their presence on natural hosts is often inconsistent for species diagnosis (von Arx, 1957; Sutton, 1966). Morphological characters may vary with environmental factors, and incubation conditions, such as media and temperature, should be standardized (Cannon et al., 2000) for species comparison and identification. Unfortunately, there is no recommended standard for...
Observations and measurements of conidial size and shape have usually been made using conidial masses mounted in water, cotton blue, or lactic acid (Cannon et al., 2008). It should be noted that many species of Colletotrichum produce secondary conidia in culture directly from germinated primary conidia; these may vary morphologically when compared to those produced in conidiomata (Cannon et al., 2000). Conidial and mycelial appressoria (also referred to as hyphopodia) are often described in Colletotrichum species. Sutton (1980) characterized the mycelial appressoria formed in potato-carrot agar (PCA) using a slide culture technique, while others have used potato dextrose agar (PDA) with incubation in the dark (Johnston and Jones, 1997; Malloch, 1981) or have observed mycelial appressoria formed on the undersurface of SNA cultures (Damm et al., 2009). Conidial appressoria have been recorded when conidia are germinated in drops of deionized water on plastic cover slips in a moist chamber (Johnson et al., 1997; Chaky et al., 2001). Conidial appressoria are taxonomically uninformative and of little use for species diagnosis (Sutton, 1980, 1992). However, Du et al. (2005) noted that the shape of appressoria can differentiate C. acutatum (with rather smooth appressoria) from C. gloeosporioides (with more lobed appressoria). Crouch et al. (2009b) found that appressoria shape and size are useful for delimiting grass-associated Colletotrichum species but should be used in combination with host range. Yang et al. (2009) found that conidial appressoria can distinguish two species of Colletotrichum from Amaryllidaceae. The conidial appressoria of C. hippeastri are larger than those of C. hymenocallidis and are irregular, crenate, or lobed, occasionally becoming complex. In contrast, C. hymenocallidis appressoria are ovate or sometimes clavate.
Cultural characteristics on agar media have been applied for the diagnosis of some Colletotrichum species (von Arx, 1957). The conidial morphology of C. gloeosporioides and C. lindemuthianum is similar, but their cultural characters are distinctly different. Colletotrichum lindemuthianum produces dark pigmentation in media and grows consistently slower than C. gloeosporioides (Baxter et al., 1983; Sutton, 1992). Likewise, C. musae grows relatively fast, forming effuse colonies and glabrous conidiomata with many conidia, while C. destructivum forms large conidiogenous zones with scattered, relatively short setae and has limited conidial production (Baxter et al., 1983). The shape and size of conidia and appressoria, as well as cultural characteristics, should be evaluated and used with caution, as these traits are highly dependent on growth conditions. Erroneous diagnosis can largely be avoided if morphology is used in conjunction with other characters such as molecular sequence data, biochemical and physiological characteristics, and host range. Crouch et al. (2009b) demonstrated that falcate-spored, grass-associated Colletotrichum species could be distinguished by a combination of molecular data, appressorial morphology, and host range. However, for most Colletotrichum species, host range has not been determined, and available information should be considered with caution, as it is often based on wrongly identified species (Damm et al., 2009).
Molecular phylogeny has become increasingly important due to the inadequacies and plasticity of morphological characters. Nucleic acid sequence analysis is regarded as more reliable for Colletotrichum classification (Sutton, 1992; Cannon et al., 2000; Crouch et al., 2009a,b; Damm et al., 2009; Prihastuti et al., 2009). A major drawback in the reliance on a small proportion of the genome to understand...
The ITS (Internal Transcribed Spacer) region is the most widely sequenced area, but concerns exist regarding whether ITS sequence data can provide adequate resolution to differentiate Colletotrichum species. Crouch et al. (2009) revealed a high error rate and a frequency of misidentification (86%) based on ITS sequence similarity comparisons within the C. graminicola species complex. ITS sequence data in the public domain can create significant confusion for end users; sequences are often entered under incorrect specific names and may represent several cryptic species. Identical sequences have frequently been recorded under different names.
We analyzed 343 ITS sequences labeled as “C. gloeosporioides” (accessed on September 6, 2009) and found that over 86% exhibited considerable evolutionary divergence from the type specimen of C. gloeosporioides (Cannon et al., 2008), likely representing other Colletotrichum species. It is crucial that sequence data generated from type specimens are utilized in species similarity comparisons and phylogenetic analyses. Due to the ease of acquisition and the extensive library of existing sequences, the ITS region remains useful in certain cases for reconstructing interspecific relationships, though it is not an ideal marker for inferring infraspecific relationships. Currently, ITS is also the only gene region available from all the ex-type or ex-epitype cultures of Colletotrichum species.
A phylogenetic tree based on ITS sequence data includes sequences from 42 ex-type or ex-epitype cultures, providing a backbone tree for further diagnosis within Colletotrichum. Taxon names, GenBank accession numbers, culture collection numbers, hosts, and the origins of the strains are summarized in Table 1. The analysis followed the methodologies outlined by Cai et al. (2008, 2009). This backbone tree can serve as a rough identification guide for Colletotrichum species.
Colletotrichum systematics should utilize a multiple-gene phylogeny alongside a study of type specimens to establish correlations between genotype and phenotype. The phenotype should be broadened to encompass a polyphasic approach, including morphology, physiology, pathogenicity, infection processes, cultural characteristics, and secondary metabolites (Frisvad, 2004; Samson and Varga, 2007). The genotypes within Colletotrichum appear to correlate with a combination of traits rather than a single characteristic. These criteria are clearly demonstrated by Crouch et al. (2009b), Damm et al. (2009), and Prihastuti et al. (2009). Crouch et al. (2009b) correlated well-defined phylogenetic groupings with a combination of appressoria and host ranges. Prihastuti et al. (2009) established new taxa within the C. gloeosporioides complex that form distinct phylogenetic lineages with unique morphological, cultural, and physiological characteristics.
Taylor et al. (2000) suggested that a genealogical concordance method should be used to recognize a phylogenetic species, with three criteria for each lineage: monophyletic, statistically supported, and genealogically concordant (i.e., no conflict among the single gene trees). Our proposal is broader, emphasizing the importance of correlating phenotypic characters to develop species concepts in a systematic and biological sense.
Relative growth rates in culture are a useful criterion for differentiating some Aspergillus and Penicillium species (Frisvad, 2004; Frisvad et al., 2007; Samson and Varga, 2007). This characteristic has also been employed in delimiting Colletotrichum species. For example, Colletotrichum acutatum grows significantly slower than C. gloeosporioides, allowing for differentiation based on growth rate (Sutton, 1992). Than et al. (2008b) and Prihastuti et al. (2009) demonstrated a strong correlation between growth rate in culture and multi-gene phylogeny in species causing chilli anthracnose and coffee berry disease.
Table 1 provides details on the rDNA ITS sequences used in the phylogenetic analysis, including various species and their corresponding GenBank accession numbers, culture collection numbers, and the references for these sequences. For instance, the table lists multiple strains of C. lupine var. setosum, C. gloeosporioides, and C. kahawae, along with their unique identifiers and the sources from which the cultures were derived. The references include unpublished work as well as studies from various authors, indicating a comprehensive collection of genetic data used for understanding the relationships among these species.
The document appears to have been truncated, which may limit the full context provided in the table. However, it highlights the importance of rDNA sequences in phylogenetic analysis within the specified fungal groups.
The table lists various species of the genus Colletotrichum, including their corresponding strains and associated data. Each entry features the species name, followed by identifiers for different strains or cultures, and their percentage similarity values, which reflect genetic relationships. Notably, the table contains a mix of strains derived from type specimens and other sources. For instance, C. curcumae is represented by strain IMI288937, with a similarity value of 78%, while C. boninense has several entries, including strains MAFF305972 and MAFF306094, with a similarity of 99%. Other species listed include C. hippeastri, C. cereale, and C. dematium, each with associated strains and similarity values ranging from 37% to 100%. The table indicates the degree of genetic variation within and among these species, highlighting the complexity of relationships within the Colletotrichum genus.
In the phylogenetic analysis presented in Fig. 1, a phylogram generated from parsimony analysis of rDNA ITS sequence data is shown. The analysis utilized random sequence addition and unweighted parsimony, treating gaps as missing data. Bootstrap values of 50% or higher are indicated above or below the branches, with thickened branches representing Bayesian posterior probabilities of 95% or more. The tree is rooted with Fusarium oxysporum, and cultures derived from type specimens are marked with an asterisk.
The document notes that Colletotrichum asianum can be distinguished from C. fructicola and C. siamense—both of which also affect coffee plants—by its significantly slower growth rate (Prihastuti et al., 2009). The utility of physiological characteristics in differentiating closely related Colletotrichum species has been established in some cases, but such assessments have not been conducted for most species within this genus. The authors suggest that carbohydrate utilization and relative growth rates should be considered as polyphasic characters for studying Colletotrichum, especially for morphologically similar species that display phylogenetic distinctions.
Pathogenicity testing is highlighted as a crucial step to determine whether a specific Colletotrichum species is host-specific or has a broader host range. Host-specific taxa may have limited distributions, which carry significant biosecurity implications. Conversely, species with a wide host range may be more cosmopolitan and potentially opportunistic pathogens. Koch’s postulates have been applied to confirm the pathogenicity of various Colletotrichum isolates. For instance, studies have shown that C. acutatum causes Rhododendron anthracnose, while C. boninense was implicated in leaf infections of Euonymus. New species descriptions occasionally include data on pathogenicity testing, although this is not always the case. Further pathogenicity research is encouraged to validate findings across verified Colletotrichum species.
The names of the Colletotrichum species used in previous studies need to be re-examined in light of a re-assessment of some of these species (Shivas and Tan, 2009). Ideally, papers epitypifying plant pathogenic taxa should include pathogenicity testing; however, this has not usually been done (e.g., Shenoy et al., 2007; Cannon et al., 2008; Than et al., 2008a; Crouch et al., 2009b; Weir and Johnston, in press).
Many fungi are asexual and may have permanently lost the ability to reproduce sexually, thus not producing ascospores (Reynolds, 1993).
Some species can produce ascospores without a partner (homothallic), such as C. falcatum and C. graminicola (von Arx and Müller, 1954; Politis, 1975; Vaillancourt and Hanau, 1991).
The failure of some heterothallic fungi to mate in artificial cultivation.
There is substantial evidence that genetically isolated groups of fungi may retain ancestral interbreeding characteristics.
A common outcome of mating tests is that they may define species encompassing more than one genetically and phylogenetically isolated group (Perkins and Turner, 1988; Chase and Ullrich, 1990; Vilgalys and Sun, 1994; Petersen and Hughes, 1999). Few studies have used cross-mating tests to distinguish between Colletotrichum species. Guerber et al. (2003) tested isolates of Colletotrichum acutatum sensu lato and concluded that two phylogenetically isolated clades have retained the ability to mate. Genetic isolation appears to have occurred before reproductive isolation in the C. acutatum complex.
In the case of the Colletotrichum gloeosporioides complex, sexual compatibility has been reported to be limited to individuals sharing the same host range (Brasier, 1987). Cisar et al. (1994) discovered that some isolates of C. gloeosporioides, pathogenic to distantly related hosts, are also sexually compatible. This finding aligns with studies on C. acutatum, indicating that genetically isolated strains may retain the ability to mate. Similar findings have been reported for Fusarium and other fungi (Donoghue, 1985; Taylor et al., 2000; Leslie et al., 2001; Amata et al., in press).
Notably, most Colletotrichum species lack a sexual state (Hyde et al., 2009), and many of the known teleomorphs, such as those of C. graminicola and C. sublineolum (Carvajal and Edgerton, 1944; Politis, 1975; Vaillancourt and Hanau, 1992), are characterized based on mating experiments conducted in the laboratory. In this context, mating experiments are essential for a comprehensive understanding of Colletotrichum species and should be prioritized in studies concerning this genus.
One of the few studies on secondary metabolites as taxonomic markers for distinguishing Colletotrichum species involved the use of lectins—proteins or glycoproteins that contain binding sites complementary in shape to specific monosaccharides or oligosaccharides (O’Connell et al., 1998). Although lectin cytochemistry proved valuable as a chemotaxonomic tool, the technique is limited by the relatively small number of sugars recognized by lectins. Additionally, interpreting assay results can be challenging when lectins exhibit affinity for more than one sugar or when binding involves non-specific hydrophobic or ionic interactions (O’Connell et al., 1998). O’Connell et al. (1998) proposed using monoclonal antibodies (MAb) in studies of Colletotrichum identification and chemotaxonomy, as they offer a much broader range of binding sites than lectins. While antibodies have been used for the identification of species such as C. gloeosporioides (Peters et al., 1998) and in taxonomic studies of zoosporic fungi (Hardham et al., 1991), their broader applicability in resolving Colletotrichum systematics remains to be explored.
Recently, morphotype, virulence phenotype, phylo-type, and chemotype were used in a polyphasic approach to clarify the taxonomic status of Colletotrichum isolates associated with anthracnose disease of yam (Dioscorea spp.) (Abang et al., 2009). Four morphotypes of C. gloeosporioides sensu lato were recognized as being associated with foliar anthracnose of yam: slow-growing grey (SGG), fast-growing salmon (FGS), fast-growing grey (FGG), and fast-growing olive (FGO). The FGG morphotype displayed a greater divergence from the other three morphotypes based on ITS sequence data. Secondary metabolite profiles analyzed through high-performance thin-layer chromatography (HPTLC) and high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) indicated that the pathogenic SGG and FGS forms had a distinct chemotype (A or B) compared to the non-pathogenic FGG form (chemotype C). A highly phytotoxic HPLC fraction was detected in virulent FGS and SGG strains but not in the FGG strains. Although it was not possible to differentiate the pathogenic FGS from the SGG forms of Colletotrichum based solely on their ITS-based phylotype, they could be clearly distinguished by their combined ITS and metabolite profiles (Abang et al., 2009). This corroborated earlier findings that these strains represent two genetically distinct populations of C. gloeosporioides sensu lato on yam (Abang et al., 2005). The presence of outliers underscores the necessity of having a large number of correctly identified strains of the same taxon for robust chemotaxonomic analyses (Anderson et al., 2008).
A new approach to Colletotrichum systematics that utilizes metabolite profiling—bringing functional characters to the forefront—may enhance our understanding of species relationships within this genus. However, accurate identification of a species and its strains using ITS and other sequence data is essential before such studies can proceed. Research in chemotaxonomy in Colletotrichum is still in its early stages, and specific recommendations are not provided here.
Infraspecific groups within Colletotrichum species are poorly understood and have largely been omitted from discussions on current nomenclature (Hyde et al., 2009). The current Code of Botanical Nomenclature outlines a few formal infraspecific categories: subspecies, variety, and form. Categories like forma specialis and pathotype have also been employed by plant pathologists to classify infraspecific groups that exhibit distinct host specializations or behaviors (Cannon, 2000). The use of subspecies, varieties, and forms within Colletotrichum has varied, with 33 introductions recorded between 1940 and 2000. The intermittent application of forma species or varieties seems to have depended as much on individual authors as on established rules. Until there is a clear understanding of what constitutes a Colletotrichum species, it may be unwise to further consider subspecies, forms, and varieties.
From a pathology perspective, there has been a more recent application of forma specialis and pathotype, with pathotypes being most frequently utilized in the genus (Lubbe et al., 2004; Suman et al., 2005; Moore et al., 2008). True pathotype differences must involve qualitative or phenotypic differences in infection (virulence) between isolates on a set of differential genotypes (Taylor and Ford, 2007). A quantitative difference in infection severity, based on lesion size, merely reflects variations in the aggressiveness of isolates and does not signify a true pathotype difference (Taylor and Ford, 2007).
The identification of pathotypes within Colletotrichum species has been based on both qualitative differences in infection—for example, C. trifolii in lucerne (Mackie et al., 2003), C. lindemuthianum in bean (Gonzalez-Chavira et al., 2004), C. acutatum in citrus (You et al., 2007), C. sublineolum in sorghum (Moore et al., 2008), C. capsici in chili pepper (Montri et al., 2009), and C. acutatum and C. gloeosporioides in chili pepper (Monkolporn et al., 2010)—and quantitative differences in severity (C. capsici in chili pepper, Sharma et al., 2005; C. falcatum in sugarcane, Suman et al., 2005) among isolates on specific host genotypes.
Some reports have indicated races of Colletotrichum species; however, races in fungal pathogens occur only when differences in isolates are determined by variations in virulence genes and corresponding host resistance genes—essentially, a gene-for-gene relationship similar to that observed in rust diseases. Mackie et al. (2007) linked races 1, 2, and 4 of C. trifolii to quantitative trait loci (QTL) associated with resistance to C. trifolii in lucerne. However, since the relationship between specific avirulence genes in the pathogen and resistance genes in the host has not been established, these variations in the pathogen should be classified as pathotypes, as described by Irwin et al. (2006).
Identifying pathotypes is not only crucial as a taxonomic tool at the infraspecific level of Colletotrichum species, but it also has implications for plant breeders aiming to develop new, improved genotypes with durable resistance to pathogens. Pathotypic differences can help relate infraspecific taxonomy back to the biological interactions between the pathogen and specific host genotypes.
DNA barcoding aims to establish an accurate, rapid, cost-effective, and universally accessible identification system for organisms by using short and standardized segments of the genome (Herbert et al., 2003, 2004; Summerbell et al., 2005). It is particularly important to establish a DNA barcoding system for Colletotrichum species, as they exhibit very simple morphologies and the current taxonomy is quite confused. The success of Colletotrichum barcoding relies on highly reliable sequences from type or verified strains and the selection of the most appropriate gene(s).
The Colletotrichum gloeosporioides species complex contains taxa with significant biological, morphological, and genetic diversity (Sutton, 1992; Hyde et al., 2009). Some of these taxa have been designated as separate species, such as C. fragariae (Johnston et al., 2008). The ITS region has a limited ability to discriminate clades within this group; hence, a more appropriate biomarker is required for barcoding. The ideal locus for use in barcoding should have low heterogeneity within species, yet enough variation to allow maximum separation of different species. The first requirement facilitates easy grouping and identification of strains from the same species, while the second minimizes misidentifications. It is also important that the gene can be easily sequenced for all species and does not require specific primers for each group (Seifert, 2009; Gilmore et al., 2009; Chen et al., 2009).
We utilized a diverse set of 64 Colletotrichum gloeosporioides sensu lato isolates, along with two C. boninense strains as outgroups, which were previously analyzed by Johnston et al. (2008). Each isolate was sequenced for six genes: ITS, GPDH (glycerol-3-phosphate dehydrogenase), CAL (calmodulin), ACT (actin), CHS (chitin synthase), and EF1α (elongation factor 1α). The 64 taxa were classified into five groups based on a multigene phylogeny (Johnston et al., 2008). Two of these groups represented named species (C. fragariae and C. horii), while one group represented Colletotrichum gloeosporioides sensu stricto. The remaining two groups, A and B (sensu Johnston and Jones, 1997), comprised diverse mostly unnamed isolates, although C. musae is included in Group A, and C. kahawae is in Group B.
A similarity matrix was generated for each gene, and results were analyzed using TaxonGap 2.4.1 (Slabbinck et al., 2008). The results graphically summarize the heterogeneity within each of the assigned groups (represented by light grey bars) and the separability of species (represented by dark grey bars). Separability indicates the ability of the gene to distinguish between groups; the minimum separability values for GPDH, CAL, ACT, and EF1α were 12.2, 11.7, 9.5, and 9.9, respectively. In contrast, ITS and CHS exhibited low minimum separability values of 3.9 and 0.3, respectively. Ideally, heterogeneity values (intra-species variation) should be low, certainly less than the respective separability value. In most cases, this holds true, with the notable exception of EF1α in Groups A, B, sensu stricto, and C. boninense. This high variability is likely due to the presence of intron variability in the EF1α sequences.
Figure 2 compares intra- and inter-species variation for six potential barcode genes. Species/groups are ordered according to their position in a maximum likelihood phylogenetic tree generated from concatenated sequences of representative strains. Separability (inter-species variation) is represented as dark grey bars, while heterogeneity (intra-species variation) is depicted as light grey bars. The vertical black line denotes the smallest separability recorded, with C. boninense used as an outgroup.
A similar set of six genes (ITS, ACT, CHS, GPDH, histone 3, and beta-tubulin) was used by Damm et al. (2009) to study Colletotrichum species with curved conidia from herbaceous hosts, which included six different clades. The best separability of the species was observed using both GPDH and histone 3 genes, which were superior to ITS, ACT, CHS, and beta-tubulin. The most appropriate gene for barcoding Colletotrichum must be selected during the species delimitation process since we can only choose one or more barcoding genes when we know which taxa need to be distinguished. A good approach would be to test and establish a selection of loci used by different groups involved in Colletotrichum systematics to work towards identifying the best barcoding gene.
Endophytes and pathogens without visible sporulation: Plant tissues should be cut into small pieces, surface sterilized by dipping in 1% sodium hypochlorite for 1 minute, then in 70% ethanol for 1 minute. They should be rinsed three times with sterilized water and finally dried on sterilized tissue paper. The plant tissues are then placed onto potato dextrose agar (PDA) containing 100 μg/ml streptomycin and 50 μg/ml tetracycline to promote fungal growth. The mycelia that grow from the plant tissue pieces are transferred onto a new PDA plate for morphological or molecular study (Than et al., 2008b).
Pathogens or epiphytes with visible sporulation: A single spore isolation technique should be used for plant tissues where spore masses are formed. Spore masses can be transferred using a sterilized wire loop or fine forceps and suspended in sterilized water. The spore suspension should be diluted to a suitable concentration and spread onto the surface of PDA agar, followed by overnight incubation at 25°C. Single germinated spores are picked with a sterilized needle and transferred onto a new PDA plate for further study (Goh et al., 1999).
Morphological studies: There is a need to standardize incubation parameters for Colletotrichum species, as comparing the morphology of species grown under different conditions can be challenging or impossible. For inoculation, it is suggested to aseptically punch and transfer a mycelial disc (about 4 mm in diameter) from the actively growing edge of a 5-day-old single conidium-derived culture onto PDA. Cultures should be incubated at 20°C, 25°C, and 30°C under constant fluorescent light. We do not recommend Sutton’s protocol, as the alternating cycles of ultraviolet irradiation and darkness are not always practical and may introduce additional factors affecting fungal growth. Three replicate cultures of each isolate should be examined. After 7 days, conidial size and shape from more than 25 conidia should be measured and recorded, and colony characteristics can be documented and photographed (Than et al., 2008a). Observations and measurements (e.g., conidial size, appressoria size, and conidiogenous cells) should be conducted in water mounts. Appressoria can be produced using a slide culture technique, in which 10 mm² plugs of PDA are placed in an empty Petri dish. The edge of the agar is inoculated with spores from a sporulating culture, and a sterile cover slip is placed over the inoculated agar (Johnston and Jones, 1997). After 7 days, the shape and size of the appressoria formed on the underside of the cover slip can be recorded.
In this paper, we suggest that species rank should be assigned to well-defined phylogenetic lineages that are associated with recognizable phenotypic characters (Taylor et al., 2000). To conduct the study, punch and aseptically transfer a mycelial disc (approximately 4 mm in diameter) from the actively growing edge of a 5-day-old single conidium-derived culture onto PDA (Potato Dextrose Agar). Cultures are then incubated at 25°C under constant fluorescent light. Three replicate cultures of each isolate should be investigated. The colony diameter of each culture is measured daily for 7 days, allowing the calculation of growth rate as the 7-day average of mean daily growth (mm per day). After 7 days, record the colony size, color of the conidial masses, and any zonation observed.
Biochemical testing can also be utilized, as several studies have reported that biochemical characters, particularly the ability to utilize citrate or tartrate as a sole carbon source, can help differentiate closely related species (Bridge et al., 2008; Prihastuti et al., 2009). The biochemical test based on substrate utilization can be assessed on agar plates according to the method of Bridge et al. (2008). Utilization of citrate and tartrate as carbon sources is tested on agar plates. The medium B (containing NH₄H₂PO₄ 1.0 g/L; KCl 0.2 g/L; MgSO₄·7H₂O 0.2 g/L in distilled water) is supplemented with 1.2% (w/v) agar, 1% (w/v) citric acid, or ammonium tartrate, and 0.005% (w/v) bromocresol purple (Waller et al., 1993; Bridge et al., 2008). Positive and negative controls, containing glucose and no additional carbon source, respectively, are included for each isolate. All media should be adjusted to pH 4.5 with NaOH or HCl prior to sterilization (Waller et al., 1993; Bridge et al., 2008). The test media are inoculated with agar plugs (4 mm in diameter) taken from 5-day-old single conidium-derived cultures. Utilization is assessed through visual comparison of growth and a rise in the pH of the medium sufficient to produce a dark blue to purple color of bromocresol purple (Waller et al., 1993; Bridge et al., 2008).
The slide culture technique to induce the formation of appressoria is illustrated in Fig. 3, which includes the following steps: A. A sporulating culture is used to prepare a spore suspension. B. The spore suspension is applied to a 10 mm square of PDA agar. C. The agar square is then covered by a sterilized cover slip. D. Finally, the setup is incubated at 25°C for 7 days.
For pathogenicity testing, pure cultures of each isolate are grown on PDA for 7–14 days at 25°C under an alternating 12-hour fluorescent light/12-hour dark cycle to induce sporulation (Than et al., 2008b). Conidia are harvested by adding 1–5 ml of sterilized distilled water to the culture, gently swirling and scraping to collect the conidia. The conidial suspension is then filtered through two layers of muslin cloth. The spore density is adjusted to a concentration of 1 × 10^6 spores/ml using a hemocytometer (Tshering, 2006).
Freshly harvested, untreated, mature but unripe fruits, leaves, or other plant parts are washed under running tap water for 60 seconds, followed by surface sterilization. This is achieved by immersing the fruits in 70% ethanol for 3 minutes, then in a 1% sodium hypochlorite solution for another 3 minutes. They are rinsed three times in sterilized distilled water for 2 minutes each time and dried with sterile tissue paper before being air-dried (Sanders and Korsten, 2003; Montri et al., 2009).
Shabi (1996) and Than et al. (2008b) describe the process of inoculating control fruits and leaves with 6 μl of sterile distilled water. The inoculated samples are incubated in containers at room temperature under normal light conditions for 7 to 14 days (see Figs. 4–5) (Than et al., 2008b). The non-wound/drop method involves placing 6 μl of conidial suspension onto the center of each fruit or leaf (Lin et al., 2002; Kanchana-udomkan et al., 2004).
Fig. 4 illustrates the incubation of fruits inoculated with spore suspension.
The evaluation of anthracnose symptoms, including lesion appearance, lesion size, conidia characteristics, and infection severity, is conducted 7 to 14 days post-inoculation (see Figs. 6–7). Lesion development on fruits and leaves is assessed by calculating the percentage of the disease area on each fruit and leaf (lesion area divided by the total fruit/leaf area). Symptoms are evaluated and scored on a 0-9 point scale based on the percentage of the infected area, as outlined by Montri et al. (2009).
1–2% of the fruit area shows necrotic lesions or larger water-soaked lesions surrounding the infection site.
>2–5% of the fruit area shows necrotic lesions, with acervuli potentially present, or water-soaked lesions up to 5% of the fruit surface.
>5–15% of the fruit area shows necrotic lesions, with acervuli present or water-soaked lesions up to 25% of the fruit surface.
>15–25% of the fruit area shows necrotic lesions with acervuli.
>25% of the fruit area shows extensive necrosis, with lesions often encircling the fruit and abundant acervuli.
Fig. 5 depicts the incubation of leaves inoculated with spore suspension.
It is important to note that artificial inoculations are frequently performed on detached or whole plants under controlled conditions, and the success of infection appears to depend on inoculum density (Bailey and Jeger, 1992). In contrast, no infection may occur under natural field conditions (Freeman et al., 1998). Although artificial host inoculation is not entirely reliable for determining host range or specificity, it serves as an indicator of infection potential (Freeman et al., 1998). Some studies have indicated that pathogenicity tests may not be reliable on detached plant tissues due to the suppression of host defense pathways (Liu et al., 2007).
We recommend following the protocols outlined by Guerber and Correll (2001) and Guerber et al. (2003). For the inoculation, we use a modified Czapek-Dox agar medium, which consists of 2 g NaNO3, 1 g K2HPO4, 0.5 g MgSO4·H2O, 0.5 g KCl, 0.01 g FeSO4, and 20 g agar per liter, adjusted to pH 7.8. For inoculation, aseptically punch and transfer a mycelial disc (4 mm in diameter) from the actively growing edge of a 5-day-old culture.
Species concepts in Colletotrichum have evolved from the use of basic morphological data to a polyphasic approach that incorporates a significant molecular component. This evolution has made traditional classifications less practical, as holotypes and other types are not very useful since DNA cannot usually be extracted. It is recommended that future studies adopt a polyphasic approach before introducing new species of Colletotrichum or designating epitypes. This approach should integrate molecular, morphological, physiological, and pathogenic data.
A detailed morphological description of the fungus should be provided (see Colletotrichum fructicola Prihastuti, L. Cai & K.D. Hyde, Fungal Diversity 39: 96, and C. anthrisci Damm, P.F. Cannon & Crous, Fungal Diversity 39: 12 for examples).
In addition to any distinctive morphological or other polyphasic characters, the proposed new species should show sufficient evolutionary divergence from other closely related taxa based on multiple gene sequence analysis. Comparisons must be made with type specimens.
It is recommended to characterize multiple gene loci, such as ITS, TUB2, GPDH, and ACT. Sequences should be deposited in a recognized international database.
Media used for descriptions and comparisons should follow the recommendations in this paper. Whenever possible, a description should also be provided from a collection on host tissues.
Ex-type cultures of any new Colletotrichum species should be deposited in at least two internationally recognized culture collections (preferably more), and all information should be registered in MycoBank.
Details of growth rates in a standard medium at standard temperatures and growth conditions should be included.
Three basic rules should be considered when determining the suitability of a specific specimen and derived culture to serve as epitype and ex-epitype (McNeill et al., 2006). The strain should be: A) from the original host, B) from the original geographic locality, and C) should match the morphology and other phenotypic characters of the type, which should be examined if available and preferentially illustrated. When an epitype is designated, the holotype, lectotype, or neotype that the epitype supports must be explicitly cited (McNeill et al., 2006).
Pathogenicity testing may be useful and should be conducted where possible. We express our gratitude to Dr. J.A. Crouch for providing unpublished sequence data and other information. We sincerely thank Dr. P.W. Crous and Dr. U. Damm for sharing their research progress and providing valuable comments on this manuscript.
Pathogenicity testing may be useful and should be conducted where possible. We express our gratitude to Dr. J.A. Crouch for providing unpublished sequence data and other information. We sincerely thank Dr. P.W. Crous and Dr. U. Damm for sharing their research progress and providing valuable comments on this manuscript.
Amata, R.L., Burgess, L.W., Summerell, B.A., Bullock, S., Liew, E.C.Y., and Smith-White, J.L. (2010). An emended description of Fusarium brevicatenulatum and F. pseudoanthophilum based on isolates recovered from millet in Kenya. In press.
Anderson, B., Dongo, A., and Pryor, B.M. (2008). Secondary metabolite profiling of Alternaria dauci, A. porri, A. solani, and A. tomatophila. Mycological Research 112: 241-250.
Arx, J.A. von (1957). Die Arten der Gattung Colletotrichum Cda. Phytopathologische Zeitschrift 29: 413-468.
Arx, J.A. von, and Müller, E. (1954). Die amerosporen Gattungen der Pyrenomyceten. Beitrage zur Kryptogamenflora der Schweiz 11: 1-434.
Bailey, J.A. and Jeger, M.J. (1992). Colletotrichum: Biology, pathology, and control. CAB International, Wallingford, UK.
Baxter, A.P., von der Westhuizen, G.C.V., and Eicher, A. (1983). Morphology and taxonomy of South African isolations of Colletotrichum. South African Journal of Botany 2: 259-289.
Brasier, C.M. (1987). The dynamics of fungal speciation. In: Evolutionary Biology of the Fungi (Eds. A.M.D. Rayner, C.M. Brasier, and D. Moore). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK: 231-260.
Bridge, P.D. (1985). An evaluation of some physiological and biochemical methods as an aid to the characterization of species of Penicillium subsection Fasciculata. Journal of General Microbiology 131: 1887-1895.
Bridge, P.D., Waller, J.M., Davies, D., and Buddie, A.G. (2008). Variability of Colletotrichum kahawae in relation to other Colletotrichum species from tropical perennial crops and the development of diagnostic techniques. Phytopathology 156: 274-280.
Cai, L., Guo, X.Y., and Hyde, K.D. (2008). Morphological and molecular characterization of a new anamorphic genus Cheirosporium from freshwater in China. Persoonia 20: 53-58.
Cai, L., Wu, W.P., and Hyde, K.D. (2009). Phylogenetic relationships of Chalara and allied species inferred from ribosomal DNA sequences. Mycological Progress 8: 133-143.
Cannon, P.F., Bridge, P.D., and Monte, E. (2000). Linking the past, present, and future of Colletotrichum systematics. In: Colletotrichum: Host Specificity, Pathology, and Host Pathogen Interaction (Eds. D. Prusky, S. Freeman, and M.B. Dickman). APS Press, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA: 1-20.
Cannon, P.F., Buddie, A.G., and Bridge, P.D. (2008). The typification of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides. Mycotaxon 104: 189-204.
Carvajal, F. and Edgerton, C.W. (1944). The perfect state of Colletotrichum falcatum. Phytopathology 34: 206-214.
Chen, W., Seifert, K.A., and Levesque, C.A. (2009). A high-density COX1 barcode oligonucleotide array for identification and detection of species of Penicillium subgenus Penicillium. Molecular Ecology Resources 9 (Suppl. 1): 114-129.
Chaky, J., Anderson, K., Moss, M., and Vaillancourt, L. (2001). Surface hydrophobicity and surface rigidity induce spore germination in Colletotrichum graminicola. Phytopathology 91: 558-564.
Chase, T.E. and Ullrich, R.C. (1990). Genetic basis of biological species in Heterobasidion annosum: Mendelian determinants. Mycologia 82: 67-72.
Cisar, C.R., Spiegel, F.W., Tebeest, D.O., and Trout, C. (1994). Evidence for mating between isolates of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides with different host specificities. Current Genetics 25: 330-335.
Correll, J.C., Guerber, J.C., Wasilwa, L.A., Sherrill, J.F., and Morelock, T.E. (2000). Inter- and intra-specific variation in Colletotrichum and mechanisms which affect population structure. In: Colletotrichum: Host Specificity, Pathology, and Host Pathogen Interaction (Eds. D. Prusky, S. Freeman, and M.B. Dickman). APS Press, St. Paul, Minnesota, USA: 145-170.
Crouch, J.A., Clarke, B.B., and Hillman, B.I. (2006).
Crouch, J.A., Tredway, L.P., Clarke, B.B., and Hillman, B.I. (2009a). Phylogenetic and population genetic divergence correspond with habitat for the pathogen Colletotrichum cereale and allied taxa across diverse grass communities. Molecular Ecology 18: 123-135.
Crouch, J.A., Clarke, B.B., White, J.F., and Hillman, B.I. (2009b). Systematic analysis of the falcate-spored graminicolous Colletotrichum and a description of six new species of the fungus from warm-season grasses. Mycologia 101: 717-732.
Crouch, J.A., Beirn, L.A., Cortese, L.M., Bonos, S.B., and Clarke, B.B. (2009c). Anthracnose disease of switchgrass caused by the novel fungal species Colletotrichum navitas. Mycological Research. doi:10.1016/j.mycres.2009.09.010.
Crouch, J.A., Clarke, B.B., and Hillman, B.I. (2009d). What is the value of ITS sequence data in Colletotrichum systematics and species diagnosis? A case study using the falcate-spored graminicolous Colletotrichum group. Mycologia 101: 648-656.
Damm, U., Woudenberg, J.H.C., Cannon, P.F., and Crous, P.W. (2009). Colletotrichum species with curved conidia from herbaceous hosts. Fungal Diversity 39: 45-87.
Donoghue, M. (1985). A critique of the biological species concept and recommendations for a phylogenetic alternative. The Bryologist 88: 172-181.
Du, M.Z., Schardl, C.L., and Vaillancourt, L.J. (2005). Using mating-type gene sequences for improved phylogenetic resolution of Colletotrichum species complexes. Mycologia 97: 641-658.
Farr, D.F., Aime, M.C., Rossman, A.Y., and Palm, M.E. (2006). Species of Colletotrichum on Agavaceae. Mycological Research 110: 1395-1408.
Freeman, S. and Shabi, E. (1996). Cross-infection of subtropical and temperate fruits by Colletotrichum species from various hosts. Physiological and Molecular Plant Pathology 49: 395-404.
Freeman, S., Katan, T., and Shabi, E. (1998). Characterization of Colletotrichum species responsible for anthracnose diseases of various fruits. Plant Disease 82: 596-605.
Freeman, S. (2000). Genetic diversity and host specificity of Colletotrichum species on various hosts. In: Colletotrichum: Host Specificity, Pathology, and Host-Pathogen Interaction (eds. D. Prusky, S. Freeman, and M.B. Dickman). APS Press, St. Paul, MN: 131-144.
Frisvad, J.C. (2004). Penicillium subgenus Penicillium – A guide to identification of food and air-borne terverticillate Penicillia and their mycotoxins. Studies in Mycology 49: 1-173.
Frisvad, J.C., Anderson, B., and Thrane, U. (2008). The use of secondary metabolite profiling in chemotaxonomy of filamentous fungi. Mycological Research 112: 231-240.
Frisvad, J.C., Larsen, T.O., de Vries, R.P., Meijer, M., Houbraken, J., Samson, R.A., Cabañes, F., and Ehrlich, K. (2007). Secondary metabolite profiling, growth profiles, and other tools for species recognition and important Aspergillus mycotoxins. Studies in Mycology 59: 31-37.
García-Pajón, C.M., and Collado, I.G. (2003). Secondary metabolites isolated from Colletotrichum species. Natural Product Reports 20: 426-431.
Gilmore, S.R., Grafenhan, T., Louis-Seize, G., and Seifert, K.A. (2009). Multiple copies of cytochrome oxidase 1 in species of the fungal genus Fusarium. Molecular Ecology Resources 9 (Suppl. 1): 90-98.
González-Chavira, M., Rodríguez-Guerra, R., Hernández-Godínez, F., Acosta-Gallegos, J.A., Martínez-de la Vega, O., and Simpson, J. (2004). Analysis of pathotypes of Colletotrichum lindemuthianum found in the central region of Mexico and resistance in elite germplasm of Phaseolus vulgaris. Plant Disease 88: 152-156.
Guerber, J.C., and Correll, J.C. (2001). Mating compatibility within and between genetically distinct subgroups of Colletotrichum acutatum. (Abstr.) Phytopathology 91: S33.
(2003). Characterization of diversity in Colletotrichum acutatum sensu lato by sequence analysis of two gene introns, mtDNA, intron RFLPs, and mating compatibility. Mycologia 95: 872-895.
Hardham, A.R., Gubler, F., Duniec, J., and Elliot, J. (1991). A review of methods for the production and use of monoclonal antibodies to study zoosporic plant pathogens. Journal of Microscopy.
Herbert, P.D.N., Cywinska, A., Ball, S.L., and Dewaard, J.R. (2003). Biological identification through DNA barcodes. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 270: 312-321.
Herbert, P.D.N., Stoeckle, M.Y., Zemlak, T.S., and Francis, C.M. (2004). Identification of birds through DNA barcodes. PLoS Biology 2: 1657-1663.
Hu, H.L., Jeewon, R., Zhou, D.Q., Zhou, T.X., and Hyde, K.D. (2007). Phylogenetic diversity of endophytic Pestalotiopsis species in Pinus armandii and Ribes spp.: Evidence from rDNA and β-tubulin gene phylogenies. Fungal Diversity 24: 1-22.
Hyde, K.D., Cai, L., Cannon, P.F., Crouch, J.A., Crous, P.W., Damm, U., Goodwin, P.H., Chen, H., Johnston, P.R., Jones, E.B.G., Liu, Z.Y., McKenzie, E.H.C., Moriwaki, J., Noireung, P., Pennycook, S.R., Pfenning, L.H., Prihastuti, H., Sato, T., Shivas, R.G., Tan, Y.P., Taylor, P.W.J., Weir, B.S., Yang, Y.L., and Zhang, J.Z. (2009). Colletotrichum – names in current use. Fungal Diversity 39: 147-183.
Hyde, K.D. and Zhang, Y. (2008). Epitypification: Should we epitypify? Journal of Zhejiang University Science B 9: 842-846.
Irwin, J.A.G., Aitken, K.S., Mackie, J.M., and Musial, J.M. (2006). Genetic improvement of lucerne for anthracnose (Colletotrichum trifolii) resistance. Australasian Plant Pathology 35: 573-579.
Jeewon, R., Liew, E.C.Y., and Hyde, K.D. (2002). Phylogenetic relationships of Pestalotiopsis and allied genera inferred from ribosomal DNA sequences and morphological characters. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 25: 378-388.
Jeewon, R., Liew, E.C.Y., Simpson, J.A., Hodgkiss, I.J., and Hyde, K.D. (2003). Phylogenetic significance of morphological characters in the taxonomy of Pestalotiopsis species. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 27: 372-383.
Johnson, D.A., Carris, L.M., and Rogers, J.D. (1997). Morphological and molecular characterization of Colletotrichum nymphaeae and C. nupharicola sp. nov. on water-lilies (Nymphaea and Nuphar). Mycological Research 101: 641-849.
Johnston, P.R. and Jones, D. (1997). Relationship among Colletotrichum isolates from fruit rots assessed using rDNA sequences. Mycologia 89: 420-430.
Johnston, P.R., Dodd, S., Park, D., Massey, B., Charuchinda, B., Waipara, N., and Buckley, T. (2008). Are stable, consistent, reliable, and useful species names possible within Colletotrichum? In: Colletotrichum Diseases of Fruit Crops. Pre-Congress workshop, ICPP 2008, Torino, Italy.
Kanchana-udomkan, C., Taylor, P.W.J., and Mongkolporn, O. (2004). Development of a bioassay to study anthracnose infection of Capsicum chinense Jacq. fruit caused by Colletotrichum capsici. Thai Journal of Agricultural Science 37: 293-297.
Kvas, M., Marasas, W.F.O., Wingfield, B.D., Wingfield, M.J., and Steenkamp, E.T. (2009). Diversity and evolution of Fusarium species in the Gibberella fujikuroi complex. Fungal Diversity 34: 1-21.
Latunde-Dada, A.O. (2001). Colletotrichum: Tales of forcible entry, stealth, transient confinement, and breakout. Molecular Plant Pathology 2: 187-198.
Lee, H.B., Park, J.Y., and Jung, H.S. (2005). Identification, growth, and pathogenicity of Colletotrichum boninense causing leaf anthracnose on Japanese spindle tree. Plant Pathology Journal 21: 27-32.
Lee, S., Crous, P.W., and Wingfield, M.J. (2006). Pestalotioid fungi from Restionaceae in the Cape.
Lin, Q., Kanchana-udomkarn, C., Jaunet, T., and Mongkolporn, O. (2002). Genetic analysis of resistance to pepper anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum capsici. Thai Journal of Agricultural Science 35: 259-264.
Liu, X.Y., Duan, J.X., and Xie, X.M. (2007). Colletotrichum yunnanense sp. nov., a new endophytic species from Buxus sp. Mycotaxon 100: 137-144.
Liu, G., Kennedy, R., Greenshields, D.L., Peng, G., Forseille, L., Selvaraj, G., and Wei, Y.D. (2007). Detached and attached Arabidopsis leaf assays reveal distinctive defense responses against hemibiotrophic Colletotrichum species. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions 20: 1308-1319.
Lubbe, C.M., Denman, S., Cannon, P.F., Groenewald, J.Z., Lamprecht, S.C., and Crous, P.W. (2004). Characterization of Colletotrichum species associated with diseases of Proteaceae. Mycologia 96: [page number not provided].
Leslie, J.F., Zeller, K.A., and Summerell, B.A. (2001). Icebergs and speciation in species of Fusarium. Physiological and Molecular Plant Pathology 59: 107-117.
Mackie, J.M., Musial, J.M., O’Neill, N.R., and Irwin, J.A.G. (2003). Pathogenic specialization of Colletotrichum trifolii in Australia and lucerne reactions to all known Australian pathotypes. Australian Journal of Agricultural Research 54: 829-836.
Mackie, J.M., Musial, J.M., Armour, D.J., Phan, H.T.T., Ellwood, S.E., Aitken, K.S., and Irwin, J.A.G. (2007). Identification of QTL for reaction to three races of Colletotrichum trifolii and further analysis of inheritance of resistance in autotetraploid lucerne. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 114: 1417-1426.
Malloch, D. (1981). Moulds, Their Isolation, Cultivation and Identification. University of Toronto Press, Toronto.
Mayr, E. (1940). Speciation phenomena in birds. American Naturalist 74: 249-278.
McNeill, J., Barrie, F.R., Burdet, H.M., Demoulin, V., Hawksworth, D.L., Marhold, K., Nicolson, D.H., Prado, J., Silva, P.C., Skog, J.E., Wiersema, J.H., and Turland, N.J. (2006). International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (Vienna Code). Ruggell: A.R.G. Gantner Verlag.
Mongkolporn, O., Montri, P., Supakaew, T., and Taylor, P.W.J. (2010). Differential reactions on mature green and ripe chili fruit infected by three Colletotrichum species. Plant Disease In press.
Montri, P., Taylor, P.W.J., and Mongkolporn, O. (2009). Pathotypes of Colletotrichum capsici, the causal agent of chili anthracnose, in Thailand. Plant Disease 93: 17-20.
Moore, J.W., Ditmore, M., and TeBeest, D.O. (2008). Pathotypes of Colletotrichum sublineolum in Arkansas. Plant Disease 92: 1415-1420.
Moriwaki, J. and Tsukiboshi, T. (2009). Colletotrichum echinochloae, a new species on Japanese barnyard millet (Echinochloa utilis). Mycoscience 50: [page number not provided].
Moriwaki, J., Sato, T., and Tsukiboshi, T. (2003). Morphological and molecular characterization of Colletotrichum boninense sp. nov. from Japan. Mycoscience 44: 47-53.
Nakamura, M., Ohzono, M., and Kei Arai, H.S. (2006). Anthracnose of Sansevieria trifasciata caused by Colletotrichum sansevieriae sp. nov. Journal of General Plant Pathology 72: 253-256.
Nirenberg, H.I., Feiler, U., and Hagendorn, G. (2002). Description of Colletotrichum lupini comb. nov. in modern terms. Mycologia 94: 307-320.
O’Connell, R.J., Nash, C., and Bailey, J.A. (1998). Lectin cytochemistry: a new approach to understanding cell differentiation, pathogenesis, and taxonomy in Colletotrichum. In: Colletotrichum: Biology, Pathology and Control (eds. J.A. Bailey and M.J. Jeger). CAB International, Wallingford: 67-87.
O’Donnell, K., Gueidan, C., Sink, S., Johnston, P.R., Crous, P.W., Glenn, A., Riley, R., Zitomer, N.C., Colyer, P., Waalwijk, C., van der Lee, T., Moretti, A., Kang, S., Kim, H.S., Geiser, D.M., Juba, J.H., [continuation not provided].
D.A., Skovgaard, K., Ploetz, R., Kistler, H.C., Elliott, M., Davis, M., and Sarver, B.A.J. (2009). A two-locus DNA sequence database for typing plant and human pathogens within the Fusarium oxysporum species complex. Fungal Genetics and Biology 46: 936-948.
Perkins, D.D., and Turner, B.C. (1988). Neurospora from natural populations: toward the population biology of a haploid eukaryote. Experimental Mycology 12: 91-131.
Peters, J., James, M., and Kenyon, L. (1998). The rapid detection of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides in yam tubers using ELISA. Poster presented at the 11th Symposium of the International Society for Tropical Root Crops, Trinidad, November 1997. Tropical Agriculture 75: 152-153.
Petersen, R.H., and Hughes, K.W. (1999). Species and speciation in mushrooms. Bioscience 49: 440-452.
Phillips, A.J.L., Crous, P.W., and Alves, A. (2007). Diplodia seriata, the anamorph of “Botryosphaeria” obtusa. Fungal Diversity 25: 141-155.
Politis, D.J. (1975). The identity and perfect state of Colletotrichum graminicola. Mycologia 56: 56-62.
Prihastuti, H., Cai, L., Chen, H., McKenzie, E.H.C., and Hyde, K.D. (2009). Characterization of Colletotrichum species associated with coffee berries in Chiang Mai, Thailand. Fungal Diversity.
Reynolds, D.R. (1993). The fungal holomorph: An overview. In: The Fungal Holomorph: Mitotic, Meiotic and Pleomorphic Speciation in Fungal Systematics (eds. D.R. Reynolds and J.W. Taylor). CAB International, Wallingford, UK: 15-25.
Samson, R.A., and Varga, J. (2007). Aspergillus systematics in the genomic era. Studies in Mycology 59.
Sanders, G.M., and Korsten, L. (2003). Comparison of cross inoculation potential of South African avocado and mango isolates of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides. Microbiological Research 128: 143-150.
Sharma, P.N., Kaur, M., Sharma, O.P., Sharma, P., and Pathanja, A. (2005). Morphological, pathological, and molecular variability in Colletotrichum capsici, the cause of fruit rot of chillies in the subtropical region of North-western India. Journal of Phytopathology 153: 232-237.
Seifert, K.A. (2009). Progress towards DNA barcoding of fungi. Molecular Ecology Resources 9 (Suppl. 1): 83-89.
Shenoy, B.D., Jeewon, R., Lam, W.H., Bhat, D.J., Than, P.P., Taylor, P.W.J., and Hyde, K.D. (2007). Morpho-molecular characterization and epitypification of Colletotrichum capsici (Glomeraceae, Sordariomycetes), the causative agent of anthracnose in chilli. Fungal Diversity 27: 197-211.
Shivas, R.G., and Tan, Y.P. (2009). A taxonomic reassessment of Colletotrichum acutatum, introducing C. fioriniae comb. et stat. nov. and C. simmondsii sp. nov. Fungal Diversity 39: 111-122.
Shivas, R.G., Bathgate, J., and Podger, F.D. (1998). Colletotrichum xanthorrhoeae sp. nov. on Xanthorrhoea in Western Australia. Mycological Research 102: 280-282.
Slabbinck, B., Dawyndt, P., Martens, M., De Vos, P., and De Baets, B. (2008). TaxonGap: a visualization tool for intra- and inter-species variation among individual biomarkers. Bioinformatics 24: 866-867.
Slippers, B., Crous, P.W., Denman, S., Coutinho, T.A., Wingfield, B.D., and Wingfield, M.J. (2004a). Combined multiple gene genealogies and phenotypic characters differentiate several species previously identified as Botryosphaeria dothidea. Mycologia 96: 83-101.
Slippers, B., Fourie, G., Crous, P.W., Coutinho, T.A., Wingfield, B.D., Carnegie, A.J., and Wingfield, M.J. (2004b). Speciation and distribution of Botryosphaeria spp. on native and introduced Eucalyptus trees in Australia and South Africa. Studies in Mycology 50: 343-358.
Stadler, M., Ju, Y.M., and Rogers, J.D. (2004). Chemotaxonomy of Entonaema, Rhopalostroma, and other Xylariaceae. Mycological Research 108: 239-256.
P. (2005). Molecular assessment of diversity among pathotypes of Colletotrichum falcatum prevalent in sub-tropical Indian sugarcane. World Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology 21: 1135-1140.
Summerbell, R.C., Lévesque, C.A., Seifert, K.A., Bovers, M., Fell, J.W., Diaz, M.R., Boekhout, T., de Hoog, G.S., Stalpers, J., and Crous, P.W. (2005). Microcoding: the second step in DNA barcoding. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 360 (1462): 1897-1903.
Sutton, B.C. (1966). Development of fraction in Colletotrichum graminicola (Ces.) Wil. and related species. Canadian Journal of Botany 44: 887-897.
Sutton, B.C. (1980). The coelomycetes: fungi imperfecti with pycnidia, acervuli, and stromata. Commonwealth Mycological Institute, Kew, England.
Sutton, B.C. (1992). The genus Glomerella and its anamorph Colletotrichum. In: Colletotrichum: Biology, Pathology and Control (Eds. J.A. Bailey and M.J. Jeger). CAB International: Wallingford: 1-26.
Sutton, B.C. and Waterston, J.M. (1970). CMI descriptions of pathogenic fungi and bacteria. No. 222.
Taylor, P.W.J. and Ford, R. (2007). Diagnostics, genetic diversity, and pathogenic variation of ascochyta blight of cool season food and feed legumes. European Journal of Plant Pathology 119: 127-133.
Taylor, J.W., Jacobson, D.J., Kroken, S., Kasuga, T., Geiser, D.M., Hibbett, D.S., and Fisher, M.C. (2000). Phylogenetic species recognition and species concepts in fungi. Fungal Genetics and Biology 31: 21-32.
Tejesvi, M.V., Kini, K.R., Prakash, H.S., Ven Subbiah, and Shetty, H.S. (2007). Genetic diversity and antifungal activity of species of Pestalotiopsis isolated as endophytes from medicinal plants. Fungal Diversity 24: 37-54.
Than, P.P., Shivas, R.G., Jeewon, R., Pongsupasamit, S., Marney, T.S., Taylor, P.W.J., and Hyde, K.D. (2008a). Epitypification and phylogeny of Colletotrichum acutatum J.H. Simmonds. Fungal Diversity 28: 97-108.
Than, P.P., Jeewon, R., Hyde, K.D., Pongsupasamit, S., Mongkolporn, O., and Taylor, P.W.J. (2008b). Characterization and pathogenicity of Colletotrichum species associated with anthracnose on chili (Capsicum spp.) in Thailand. Plant Pathology 57: 562-572.
Thaung, M.M. (2008). Coelomycete systematics with special reference to Colletotrichum. Mycoscience 49: 345-350.
Tomioka, K., Moriwaki, J., and Sato, T. (2008). Anthracnose of Polygonatum falcatum caused by Colletotrichum dematium. Journal of General Plant Pathology 74: 402-404.
Tshering, K. (2006). Host-pathogen interaction of Colletotrichum capsici on chili peppers. M.Sc. Thesis. The University of Melbourne.
Vaillancourt, L.J. and Hanau, R.M. (1991). A method for genetic analysis of Glomerella graminicola (Colletotrichum graminicola) from maize. Phytopathology 81: 530-853.
Vaillancourt, L.J. and Hanau, R.M. (1992). Genetic and morphological comparisons of Glomerella (Colletotrichum) isolates from maize and from sorghum. Experimental Mycology 16: 219-229.
Vilgalys, R. and Sun, B.L. (1994). Ancient and recent patterns of geographic speciation in the oyster mushroom Pleurotus revealed by phylogenetic analysis of ribosomal DNA sequences. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 91: 4599-4603.
Vinnere, O., Fatehi, J., Wright, S.A.I., and Gerhardson, B. (2002). The causal agent of anthracnose of Rhododendron in Sweden and Latvia. Mycological Research 106: 60-69.
Waller, J.W., Bridge, P.D., Black, R., and Hakiza, G. (1993). Characterization of the coffee berry disease pathogens, Colletotrichum kahawae sp. nov. Mycological Research 97: 989-994.
Weir, B.S. and Johnston, P.R. (2010). Characterisation...
Yang, Y.L., Liu, Z.Y., Cai, L., Hyde, K.D., Yu, Z.N., and McKenzie, E.H.C. (2009). Colletotrichum anthracnose of Amaryllidaceae. Fungal Diversity, 39: 123-146.
You, B.J., Choquer, M., and Chung, K.R. (2007). The Colletotrichum acutatum gene encoding a putative pH-responsive transcription regulator is a key virulence determinant during fungal pathogenesis on citrus. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions, 20: 1149-1160.
