Strawberries, perhaps the most delectable of fruits, are grown for their attractiveness and exquisite flavor in most temperate and many tropical areas of the world. Some believe the world would indeed be a dull place without strawberries to excite the taste buds and enliven desserts and pastries. Strawberry cultivation can be traced back thousands of years, with origins in Europe well documented in literature and art. Fragaria vesca L. (diploid, 2n=14 chromosomes) and F. moschata (hexaploid, 2n=42 chromosomes) were cultivated in palace and church gardens. Strawberry culture in the New World, particularly in North and South America, is less well documented. North American natives appreciated the springtime appearance of F. virginiana Duchesne (octaploid, 2n=56 chromosomes) fruit, although this species was likely not cultivated until Europeans began exploring and settling in North America. However, native inhabitants of Chile and Peru had selected and cultivated superior variants of F. chiloensis (L.) Quebe- sene (octaploid, 2n=56 chromosomes) well before the arrival of conquistadors in the 16th century.
The modern strawberry, Fragaria × ananassa Duchesne, is of relatively recent origin. It was not until the North American F. virginiana and the South American F. chiloensis were brought together and hybridized in Europe around 1750 that the progenitor of the strawberry we know today was developed. The high degree of genetic heterozygosity in Fragaria spp. has facilitated the creation of strawberry cultivars adapted to a wide range of environmental conditions and resistant to several diseases and pests. Today, cultivars are available that can survive the bitterly cold winters of Alaska, as well as those that thrive in the long, hot seasons of Pretoria, South Africa.
Although strawberries are considered a minor crop, they provide a significant source of income for many fruit and nursery growers. In the United States, strawberries were cultivated on nearly 20,000 hectares in 1989, yielding a total production of 555,000 tons valued at $520 million. Florida ranks second only to California in the production of fresh-market strawberries. For U.S. winter production (December through March), strawberries are grown on approximately 2,400 hectares. The major cultural problems faced by the Florida strawberry industry include: 1) anthracnose diseases, 2) yearly infestations of the two-spotted spider mite (Tetranychus urticae Koch), and 3) variability in the quality of nursery transplants. Commercial fields are established annually, similar to California practices. Freshly dug transplants are sourced from nurseries in Florida or from northern states and Canada. The use of transplants from northern nurseries is crucial to avoid anthracnose disease issues and to ensure that plants have undergone sufficient natural chilling to induce floral bud initiation.
In comparison to other strawberry-producing regions of the world, we present the history of anthracnose occurrence, the symptoms caused by the Colletotrichum complex in Florida, and the control measures developed for Florida strawberry growers.
The term "anthracnose" was first used to describe a new disease of strawberries caused by Colletotrichum fragariae Brooks. "Strawberry anthracnose" continues to be used as a general term to identify all diseases of strawberries caused by species of Colletotrichum. Strawberry anthracnose diseases have been reported to be caused by C. acutatum J.H. Simmonds, C. gloeosporioides (Penz.) Penz. & Sacc. in Penz. (the teleomorph of Cromereilla cingulata (Stoneman) Spauld. & H. Schrenk), and C. dematium (Pers.) Grove. The latter species only occasionally causes strawberry fruit rots and will not be discussed here.
Anthracnose fungi can attack various parts of the strawberry plant, including crowns, petioles, leaves, fruit trusses, flowers, buds, and fruit. The fungi's ability to attack multiple plant parts, coupled with the involvement of several pathogen species, contributes to the complex nature of strawberry anthracnose. Brooks reported in 1931 that C. fragariae caused spotting and girdling of runners, and later indicated that it also caused spotting of petioles and crown rot in a summer nursery, leading to wilting and death of the plants. Researchers in Louisiana observed all these symptoms and noted that crown rot also occurred in the fruit production field.
In 1972, Howard described fruit rot in Florida caused by C. fragariae. Fruit rots attributed to anthracnose fungi have also been reported in several other areas of the United States, such as Gloeosporium sp. in Maryland, C. acutatum in Ohio, and Colletotrichum spp. in various other locations.
