Department of Plant Pathology, The Ohio State University, Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center (OARDC), Wooster, OH 44691.
Accepted for publication: 17 March 1997.
Ntahimpera, N., Madden, L. V., and Wilson, L. L. 1997. Effect of rain distribution alteration on splash dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum. Phytopathology 87:649-655.
The splash dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum conidia from infected strawberry fruit was assessed using a rain simulator to determine the rain properties (e.g., intensity measured in millimeters per hour and drop size distribution) most related to dissemination. Dispersal with a simulated rain corresponding to a natural rain of about 11 mm/h was compared with dispersal under three other simulated rain conditions that had larger and smaller average drop sizes than those found in idealized natural rains. Splash droplets were collected in sheltered Petri plates containing a selective medium for Colletotrichum, and colonies formed from conidia entrained in the droplets were counted to measure dispersal. Most colonies were confined to a 27-cm radius from the source, and the density of colonies decreased exponentially.
The propagules of many fungal plant pathogens are dispersed from infected hosts by rain splash. Dispersal occurs through the impact of water drops onto inoculum-bearing surfaces, the entrainment of spores in splash droplets, and the subsequent movement of droplets to new locations. Splash dispersal is positively affected by the size and velocity of individual raindrops.
Rain possesses many environmental variables, including spatial and temporal characteristics (time of event, frequency, and duration) and intensity features. Rain intensity indicates not only the volume of water incident on a unit area over time but also the number and size distribution of drops, along with the kinetic energy of the drop impacts. Rain intensity can positively, negatively, or insignificantly affect new plant infections resulting from dispersal, even though increasing intensity simultaneously raises incident rain volume, the number of drops, and drop sizes.
Strawberry anthracnose is caused by several Colletotrichum species, with C. acutatum J.H. Simmonds being the dominant species in many parts of the United States. Conidia of C. acutatum are produced in acervuli, a characteristic of rain-splashed fungi. Previous studies of C. acutatum have characterized the physical aspects of dispersal from single-drop impacts and simulated rain over experimental areas, quantifying the effects of surface topography and plant density on dispersal and disease spread. Recently, Madden et al. characterized the relationship between rain intensity and splash dispersal of C. acutatum across a wide range of intensities. The number of dispersed spores increased with increasing intensity, as expected.
Additional Keywords: anthracnose, disease spread, Fragaria × ananassa, models, quantitative epidemiology.
Based on properties of rain and the known effects of single-drop impacts on dispersal, there was a nonlinear relationship between rain intensity and the proportion of fruit exposed to the rain that became infected by Colletotrichum acutatum. Maximum fruit infection occurred at an intermediate rain intensity of about 30 mm/h. Although more spores were removed from the source as intensity increased, the wash-off of spores from potential infection sites also increased, leading to this nonlinear response.
In the study by Madden et al., increasing rain intensity was achieved by adjusting the number and size of simulated raindrops, as well as the incident volume of water per unit area and time, which presumably also affected the kinetic energy. This setup aimed to replicate the intensity characteristics of a single idealized type of natural rain (e.g., shower, thunderstorm). However, it was not possible to determine which specific component of the rain was responsible for the observed dispersal effects.
The objective of this study was to examine how the splash dispersal of C. acutatum is influenced by generated rains with drop distributions differing from idealized natural rains. Specifically, rains were generated with average drop sizes larger and smaller than those found in natural rains of a single type. It was hypothesized that splash dispersal would be greatest for rains with larger drop sizes, given similar incident water volumes per unit area and time (i.e., intensity). It was further hypothesized that fruit infection would not correlate with the altered rain distribution due to the complex relationship previously established between rain intensity and fruit disease incidence. Preliminary results were reported earlier.
Materials and Methods: Rain Generation System. A rain simulator developed at The Ohio State University, Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center, was utilized to investigate the impact of varying rain intensity on the dispersal of conidia. The system featured an upward-pointing and rotating wide-angle spray nozzle that created a conical pattern, ensuring uniform rain generation across a 1.2 × 1.2 m experimental area. The height of the drop fall was 4 m, with water pressure levels maintained at either 69 or 138 kPa at the nozzle orifice, controlled by a precision flow valve. Two spray nozzles, designated 10W and 20W, were used individually in this study to produce simulated rains.
The intensity was determined for each treatment as described by Reynolds et al. (24). Twelve 10-cm-diameter funnels were placed in cylinders, approximately evenly distributed over the experimental area. Rain was generated for 15 minutes, and the volume of water collected was determined and converted to milliliters per square centimeter per hour. Intensity was evaluated three times for each treatment. For the nozzle/pressure treatments of 10W/138 kPa, 20W/69 kPa, and 20W/138 kPa, the cumulative volume distribution (the proportion of total water volume accounted for by drops less than or equal to a certain diameter) was determined from drop size data provided by the manufacturer (Spraying Systems Inc.).
For the treatment consisting of 20W/69 kPa with the screen, drops were collected on water-sensitive paper (WSP) (Spraying Systems Inc.), as previously done in single-drop studies (24, 26). Thirty-seven 75 × 52-mm cards of WSP were exposed immediately above the target area for about 1 second and then dried. The diameters of drop traces on the WSP were determined using an image analyzing computer (Dapple Systems Inc., Sunnyvale, CA), following the method described in Reynolds et al. (26). The equivalent diameter of circles was calculated based on a spread factor of two (26). The mass (volume) median diameter (D0¢) of impacting incident drops (per unit of area and time) was determined from the cumulative volume distribution. Half of the volume or mass of incident rain is determined by drops less than (or greater than) this diameter (19). D0¢ is directly related to, but slightly larger than, the mass median diameter of drops per cubic meter of air above a surface (D0). For natural rains of a single type, D0 (and hence, D0¢) increases with intensity (30).
Inoculum: The isolate of Colletotrichum acutatum used in this experiment (ATCC 90170) was the same as in previous studies (33, 38, 39). To maintain pathogenicity, strawberry fruit were inoculated with the fungus regularly, and the fungus was then reisolated from infected fruit by scraping conidia from infected fruit and streaking on potato dextrose agar (PDA) (33, 39). Cultures were incubated in the dark at 25°C for up to 7 days. Spore suspensions were prepared by scraping conidia from cultures and suspending them in deionized water. The density was adjusted to 10^5 conidia per milliliter with the aid of a hemacytometer.
To prepare inoculum-source fruit for dispersal tests, detached, immature (green-to-white stage) strawberry fruit from greenhouse-grown plants were washed with deionized water, surface-sterilized in 70% ethanol for 60 seconds, rinsed with deionized water, dried, and placed on elevated screens (6-mm mesh) contained in 5-liter plastic containers. The containers were filled with approximately 700 ml of deionized water. The pedicel of each fruit was inserted through the mesh of the metal screen and immersed in water to minimize fruit desiccation. The fruit were then sprayed to runoff with the conidial suspension. The containers were closed and incubated at 25°C for 24 hours to ensure infection (33). After this time, the lids were removed, and the fruit were kept at 25°C for 7 days to ensure lesion development and sporulation.
Sheltered Gravity Samplers and Spore Deposition: Gravity samplers, consisting of petri plates with selective media shielded from rain, were used to sample conidia of C. acutatum dispersed in rain splash droplets. A wooden frame (1.5 × 1.5 m) was placed immediately below the rain generator (38, 39). The frame was covered with a steam-sterilized soil mix to a depth of about 3 cm.
Table Description: The table presents characteristics of rain-simulator spray nozzles, including rain intensity, splashed intensity, and colonies of Colletotrichum acutatum in petri plates for four treatments. It details the generated median rain intensity in milliliters per square centimeter per hour, the percentage of incident colonies, and the relationship between the transformed rain intensity and the corresponding drop size that matched natural rain conditions. This information is essential for understanding how different treatments impact the dispersal of the fungal pathogen.
The experimental setup involved a mixture of soil and peat moss (5:1 by volume), supplemented with 150 g of 9-45-15 N-P-K fertilizer and lime. This mixture was discarded after each test run. To measure the volume of splashed water, five sheltered gravity samplers were placed randomly over the experimental area, ensuring that there was at least 40 cm between each sampler. Petri plates (9 cm in diameter) containing selective medium for Colletotrichum were labeled and weighed immediately before use. At 12 and 27 minutes into a simulated rain, plates were positioned under rain shields for 2 to 3 minutes of exposure. The shields prevented the collection of directly impacting raindrops. Plates were then collected and immediately reweighed to determine the weight gain from water splashed into each plate. Controls included three plates with media weighed at the same time but not exposed to rain. The average weight loss in the control plates, due to evaporation of water in the media, was used to adjust the weight changes in the rain-exposed plates. The intensity of splashed water was calculated for each test run of the rain simulation and converted to volumetric units of milliliters per square centimeter per hour, based on the density of water. Each rain intensity was tested three times.
For splash-dispersal determination, the frame was evenly covered with sterilized soil mix, and five inoculated fruit with sporulating lesions were clustered on the ground 30 to 40 cm from one corner of the frame. Petri plates (6 cm in diameter) containing selective medium for Colletotrichum were positioned without lids under metal rain shields at distances of 12, 27, 42, 57, and 72 cm from the inoculum source, following methodologies described by Madden and Yang et al. To test for contamination of the soil cover, one plate was placed under rain shelters and exposed to 1 minute of rain before introducing the source fruit. Starting at 0 minutes into a simulated rain, plates were exposed to splashing water every 5 minutes for 1-minute intervals, for a total duration of 61 minutes. New plates were used for each time period and distance. Exposed plates were covered with lids and incubated at 25°C for 2 days before being transferred to a refrigerator at 6°C for 2 to 3 days.
Strawberry plants (cv. Midway) were grown from transplants in 15-cm-diameter pots filled with a sterilized soil mix (soil/peat/sand in a 2:2:1 ratio by volume) within a greenhouse. Twenty plants were used for each rain simulation. The methods employed were consistent with those previously described by Madden et al. (18,19). The potted plants were supported by a wooden frame measuring 1.5 × 1.5 m, arranged in two concentric circles with radii of 30 cm and 60 cm, placed directly beneath the rain generator (18). The frame was covered with the sterilized soil mix, ensuring that the soil level was even with the base of the plants.
Five infected source fruits (prepared similarly to the gravity sampler study) were clustered tightly on the soil at the center of the circles. To ensure consistency in the number and positioning of sample fruits for each treatment, 40 detached, healthy, immature strawberry fruits were placed on the soil surface immediately in front of the inner portion of the plant crowns in each of the two circles. The entire area was subjected to rainfall for 16 minutes (18). At both 4 and 16 minutes into the rain event, 20 exposed fruits from each circle were collected and placed on elevated wire-mesh screens in 5-liter containers, which were then covered and incubated at 25°C. After 24 hours, the lids were removed to allow for natural drying. The pedicel ends of the fruits were cut, and the fruits were returned to the containers with their pedicels inserted through the wire-mesh screens into deionized water. The containers were returned to the incubator at 25°C, and the assessment of fruit infection was conducted through visual examination of each fruit seven days after each rain simulation. The proportion of infected fruits (disease incidence) was used as the measure of conidia dispersal (14,18).
The number of colonies on a petri plate, converted to units of area and time (Y, measured as number per square centimeter per minute), was determined for each distance, duration of rain, treatment, and repetition. Y is proportional to the deposition flux density of conidia (35). Assuming equal dispersal in all directions due to the absence of airflow, the interpolated total number of colonies (S) during each 61-minute period over a circular area with a radius of 72 cm (the maximum distance measured) was estimated through numerical integration over both the distance and time domains. The integration was conducted using Simpson’s 1/8 rule with the assistance of SURFER software (Golden Software, Inc., Golden, CO).
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed on incident rain, volume of water splashed, total number of colonies (S), and fruit disease incidence. For each treatment, means and their standard errors were calculated prior to transformation. To stabilize the variances, S was transformed to S^1/5 before statistical analysis (15,19). A square-root transformation was applied to splashed rain intensity. Additionally, the proportion of infected fruit (y) was transformed using the complementary log-log transformation, defined as y* = ln[–ln(1 – y)]. For fruit disease incidence, ANOVA was conducted on y* as a repeated measures experiment (19), in which treatments and blocks (experimental repetitions) were considered the randomized factors, while distance from the source and rain duration served as spatial and temporal repeated measures, respectively.
The incident rain volumes (per unit area and time) from the different treatments were significantly different from one another (P < 0.001), as determined by ANOVA. The variability was very low. The standard treatment (20W/69 kPa) produced the lowest volume of water. When a horizontal screen was placed below the nozzle orifice, it resulted in a slightly higher incident rain volume compared to the standard treatment, likely because water accumulated before dripping onto the experimental area. Using the same nozzle at a higher pressure (20W/138 kPa) produced 79% more incident rain than the standard treatment. Additionally, the incident rain volume generated by the small nozzle at higher water pressure (10W/138 kPa) was 44% greater than that of the standard treatment.
The cumulative volume distributions of simulated rains are depicted in Figure 1. The curves for the small nozzle at higher pressure (10W/138 kPa) and the 20W/138 kPa treatment were positioned to the left of the cumulative distribution of the standard treatment, indicating smaller overall drop sizes. Conversely, the cumulative volume distribution for the screen treatment was located to the right of the standard treatment for drop diameters less than 2.7 mm. For larger drop sizes, the distribution for the screen treatment reached its maximum (100%) abruptly. The mass median drop diameter (D0') was reduced by increasing water pressure at the 20W nozzle orifice. For the 10W nozzle at 138 kPa, D0' was also lower than for the standard treatment.
The 20W/69 kPa treatment with the screen resulted in a D0' of 2.3 mm, which was 28% higher than that of the standard treatment. The standard treatment (20W/69 kPa) produced a rain with a cumulative volume distribution that matched that of an idealized natural rain of approximately 11 mm/h. Other treatments were referenced in the appendix of Madden et al. Specifically, D0 was calculated using the formula D0 = 3.67/(41I - 0.21), where I represents rain intensity in millimeters per hour. It was shown that D0' = 4.34/(41I - 0.21). Natural rains with D0' values similar to those found for the 10W/138 kPa and 20W/138 kPa treatments had intensities of 3 and 5 mm/h, respectively, despite these treatments generating more water than the standard treatment (11 mm/h). A natural rain with a D0' of 2.3 mm (as found for the screen treatment) would have an intensity greater than 40 mm/h.
For all treatments, the volume of water splashed was lower after 12 minutes than after 27 minutes of rain application, and the treatment had a significant effect on the volume splashed (P = 0.002). After 12 minutes, splashed water from the standard treatment (20W/69 kPa) was slightly, but significantly (P = 0.05), less than that from other treatments. The 10W/138 kPa and 20W/138 kPa treatments had similar splash water intensities; however, the screen treatment exhibited a much higher splash intensity than the others. The percentage of water splashed relative to incident rain ranged from 2% to 7%, with the largest percentage associated with the screen treatment. Similar results were observed after 27 minutes of rain application.
Figure 2: The mean number of Colletotrichum acutatum colonies (Y; cm² min⁻¹) on a selective medium (under a rain shield) is related to rain duration (t; min) and distance (s; cm) from the inoculum source for four rain simulation treatments. The numbers above the figures indicate the nozzle type (10W or 20W) and pressure (69 or 138 kPa). The square root of Y (SQRT[Y]) was used to better illustrate the data at distances of 42 cm and beyond, where colony density was low.
The table included presents estimated parameters along with their standard errors for each treatment condition. Specifically, it includes various treatment combinations (e.g., 20W/138, 20W/69Sc, and 10W/138) and associated values such as colony counts and parameters related to spore release rates (Q¢), showcasing their statistical significance and correlation with distance. Notably, the treatment with the screen had the highest total number of colonies, while the 10W/138 kPa treatment had the lowest. The analysis shows a strong correlation between total colonies and distance from the inoculum source.
Gravity Sampler Study: The mean colony density (Y) patterns for each treatment relative to rain duration and distance from the inoculum source are depicted in Figure 2. Consistent with previous studies, Y generally decreased with distance at any time but increased over time to a maximum before declining. The 20W/69 kPa-screentreatment exhibited the highest colony density, while treatments with 138 kPa of water pressure resulted in lower densities. ANOVA results indicate significant differences in total colonies based on treatments (P < 0.001), with block repetition not affecting results significantly (P > 0.20). The standard treatment showed nine times as many colonies as the 10W/138 kPa treatment, and a linear relationship between the fifth root of S and D0¢ was established, yielding a strong coefficient of determination (r² = 0.94).
Diffusion-Type Model: Yang et al.'s diffusion-type model provided an acceptable fit for Y in relation to rain duration and distance, except for one treatment. The initial spore release parameter (Q¢) was notably highest for the screen treatment (74,918 min⁻¹), over double that of the standard treatment, while the 10W/138 kPa treatment had the lowest Q¢ estimate (3,391 min⁻¹). There was a strong positive correlation between Q¢ and distance, although the spore loss rate (g) did not clearly relate to treatments. Notably, the standard error for g was large in the screen treatment, indicating imprecision.
Fruit Infection Study: The main effects of rain duration and distance from the inoculum source significantly affected the proportion of infected fruit (y*) (P = 0.004), with no significant interaction between time and distance (P > 0.05), and block repetition did not significantly impact results.
Parameter descriptions are provided in the text. The nozzle/pressure (kPa) for the treatments was noted, with standard errors in parentheses. The horizontal screen was placed immediately below the spray nozzle.
The results showed a general trend of increasing Y with time and decreasing Y with distance for all treatments. The main effect of treatment was not significant (P > 0.06), although the mean Y for the small nozzle (10W/138 kPa) was low at all times and distances (as shown in Table 3). The fruit disease incidence for 10W/138 kPa was about one-third that of the standard treatment at 30 cm and less than half at 60 cm from the inoculum source. All interactions of treatment with other factors were not significant (P > 0.40).
The drop size distribution of rain was identified as an important determinant of the splash dispersal of C. acutatum spores. Experimental treatments with high water pressure at the nozzle orifice (10W/138 kPa and 20W/138 kPa) had somewhat higher incident rain (R) and splashed rain (Rs) intensity (milliliters per square centimeter per hour) compared to the standard, idealized natural rain treatment (20W/69 kPa). However, the standard treatment had significantly greater spore dispersal, as measured by colonies in gravity samplers. The higher rain intensity from the nozzles with high pressure resulted from the production of more, but smaller, drops on average compared to the natural rain treatment, causing a shift in the drop volume distribution to the left, resulting in smaller D' values.
Additionally, the treatment with the screen showed the largest D00', splashed the highest volume of water, and percentage of the incident rain, leading to considerably more dispersed spores than the other treatments. Overall, dispersal was highly and positively correlated with the estimated D0' of the rains, but not related to the R of these deliberately altered rains.
In natural rains of a single type, increasing rain intensity correlates with an increasing number of raindrops per unit area and time. D0' increases from about 1.2 mm with 2 mm/h of idealized natural rain to about 2.5 mm with 60 mm/h of rain, with a corresponding increase in the frequency of drops of any given diameter with increasing rain intensity. The drop size distribution is influenced by the type of rain episode in addition to rain intensity. For instance, thunderstorms generally exhibit larger D0' (or D0) than showers or oceanographic rains. Thus, two rains of different types but similar intensities may differ significantly in kinetic energy, indicating that factors beyond simple intensity may be needed to assess the risk of dispersal events.
Splash rain intensity (Rs) can be viewed as an indication of the total kinetic energy of impacting water drops. Results from controlled studies with single-drop impacts show that the volume of splashed water from a strawberry fruit is a positive function of the incident water-drop kinetic energy. Other studies using single-sized drops also found an increase in splash volume with kinetic energy.
The splash dispersal of spores increased with the size of drops, which in turn affects their velocity and kinetic energy (7, 9, 11, 12, 32, 38). In our study, Rs increased with an increase in D0, except for the 20W/69 kPa treatment. Since D0 is merely a single measure of the cumulative volume distribution of rain, it may not fully reflect the kinetic energy generated by the rains. For a single drop, kinetic energy upon impact is proportional to the cube of the drop diameter multiplied by the square of the velocity. Terminal velocity is proportional to the two-thirds power of the drop diameter (19). Therefore, the kinetic energy for a drop at terminal velocity is directly related to the drop diameter raised to the 4.3 power (i.e., 3 + [2 × 0.67]), meaning the largest drops contribute most of the total kinetic energy during a rain episode (1, 13). Consequently, slight changes in the frequency of large drops can significantly impact the total kinetic energy per unit area and time.
However, kinetic energy may not be the best indicator of dispersal, as S was more closely related to D0 than to Rs, consistent with findings from single-drop studies (37). As anticipated (18, 19, 24, 39), infection rates of rain-exposed healthy fruit near the inoculum source (30 cm) were higher than those located at 60 cm. Additionally, infection rates were greater for fruit exposed to 16 minutes of rain compared to those exposed for only 4 minutes. However, alterations in rain distribution did not significantly affect fruit disease incidence. This is hypothesized to result from the previously observed nonlinear relationship between R and y (19), where y increased with R to a maximum and then declined, primarily due to the wash-off of spores from the fruit. Although dispersed spores increased with D0, it is likely that wash-off also increased. Therefore, expanding on Madden et al. (19), it appears that increasing rain intensity or shifting drop distribution to larger sizes at a single intensity may not lead to greater disease incidence, even if more spores are dispersed.
The deposition of C. acutatum spores in gravity samplers sharply declined with distance from the source, as expected (3, 4, 6, 11, 22, 39). Although most colonies of C. acutatum were found within 30 cm of the source, there were still sufficient spores at 60 cm to cause infections in fruit across all treatments. The diffusion-type model proposed by Yang et al. (35) adequately described the colony data for three of the four treatments, with the estimated initial spore release parameter (Q0) increasing with D0 and showing a strong correlation with S. Madden et al. (19) previously established that Q0 increases with R for idealized rains of a single type. However, the estimated parameter for gradient length (α) was inconsistent, as noted by both Madden et al. (19) and Yang et al. (35). Furthermore, the spore loss parameter (γ) did not correlate with treatments, although the less satisfactory fit of the model to the data for the screen treatment may have hindered comparisons of γ. The γ values for three treatments were similar, likely reflecting the narrow range of R tested in this study compared to that used by Madden et al. (19).
Dispersal of inoculum via rain splash has been identified as a critical mechanism for disease spread over short distances in crops (11, 17, 22, 26, 27). Factors such as wind (3, 4, 22), ground cover (surface topography) (16, 34, 38), and plant density (2) all influence splash dispersal. However, the interactions between rain properties (e.g., intensity) and surface and plant canopy characteristics remain unresolved.
Research support and salaries were provided by state and federal funds (especially USDA-NRI competitive grant 95-37303-1788) allocated to the Ohio Agricultural Research and Development Center (OARDC), The Ohio State University. Journal article 33-97.
Boudreau, M. A., and Madden, L. V. 1995. Effect of strawberry density on dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum by simulated rain. Phytopathology 85:654.
Brennan, R. M., Fitt, B. D. L., Taylor, G. C., and Colhoun, J. 1985. Dispersal of Septoria nodorum pycnidiospores by simulated raindrops in still air. Phytopathology Z. 112:281-290.
Brennan, R. M., Fitt, B. D. L., Taylor, G. C., and Colhoun, J. 1985. Dispersal of Septoria nodorum pycnidiospores by simulated rain and wind. Phytopathology Z. 112:291-297.
Eastburn, D. M., and Gubler, W. D. 1990. Strawberry anthracnose: Detection and survival of Colletotrichum acutatum in soil. Plant Disease 74:161-163.
Fatemi, F., and Fitt, B. D. L. 1983. Dispersal of Pseudocercosporella herpotrichoides and Pyrenopeziza brassicae spores in splash droplets. Plant Pathology 32:401-404.
Fitt, B. D. L., Creighton, N. F., Lacey, M. E., and McCartney, H. A. 1986. Effects of rainfall intensity and duration on dispersal of Rhynchosporium secalis conidia from infected barley leaves. Transactions of the British Mycological Society 86:611-618.
Fitt, B. D. L., and McCartney, H. A. 1986. Spore dispersal in splash droplets. Pages 87-104 in: Water, Fungi and Plants. P. G. Ayres and L. Boddy, eds. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Fitt, B. D. L., McCartney, H. A., Creighton, N. F., Lacey, M. E., and Walklate, P. J. 1988. Dispersal of Rhynchosporium secalis conidia from infected barley leaves or straw by simulated rain. Annals of Applied Biology 112:49-59.
Fitt, B. D. L., McCartney, H. A., and Walklate, P. J. 1989. The role of rain in dispersal of pathogen inoculum. Annual Review of Phytopathology 27:241-270.
Grove, G. G., Madden, L. V., and Ellis, M. A. 1985. Splash dispersal of Phytophthora cactorum from infected strawberry fruit. Phytopathology 75:611-615.
Huber, L., Fitt, B. D. L., and McCartney, H. A. 1996. The incorporation of pathogen spores into rain-splash droplets: A modeling approach. Plant Pathology 45:506-517.
Kinnell, P. I. A. 1981. Rainfall intensity–kinetic energy relationships for soil loss prediction. Soil Science Society of America Journal 45:153-155.
Madden, L. V. 1992. Rainfall and the dispersal of fungal spores. Advances in Plant Pathology 8:39-79.
Madden, L. V. 1993. Aggregation of Colletotrichum acutatum in response to simulated rain episodes. Journal of Phytopathology 138:145-156.
Madden, L. V., and Ellis, M. A. 1990. Effects of ground cover on splash dispersal of Phytophthora cactorum from strawberry fruits. Journal of Phytopathology 129:170-174.
Madden, L. V., Wilson, L. L., and Ellis, M. A. 1993. Field spread of anthracnose fruit rot of strawberry in relation to ground cover and ambient weather conditions. Plant Disease 77:861-866.
Madden, L. V., Wilson, L. L., Yang, X., and Ellis, M. A. 1992. Splash dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum and Phytophthora cactorum by short-duration simulated rains. Plant Pathology 41:427-436.
Madden, L. V., Yang, X., and Wilson, L. L. 1996. Effects of rain intensity on splash dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum. Phytopathology 86:864-874.
Marshall, J. S., and Palmer, W. M. 1948. The distribution of raindrops by size. Journal of Meteorology 5:165-166.
Pedersen, E. A., Morrall, R. A. A., McCartney, H. A., and Fitt, B. D. L. 1994. Dispersal of conidia of Ascochyta fabae f. sp. lentis from infected lentil plants by simulated wind and rain. Plant Pathology 43:50-55.
Prupacher, H. R., and Klett, J. D. 1980. Microphysics of Clouds and Precipitation. D. Reidel Publishing Co., Dordrecht, Holland.
Reynolds, K. M., Madden, L. V., and Ellis, M. A. (1988). Effect of weather variables on strawberry leather rot epidemics. Phytopathology, 78: 822-827.
Reynolds, K. M., Madden, L. V., Reichard, D. L., and Ellis, M. A. (1987). Methods for studying raindrop impact on plant surfaces with application to predicting inoculum dispersal by rain. Phytopathology, 77: 226-232.
Reynolds, K. M., Madden, L. V., Reichard, D. L., and Ellis, M. A. (1989). Splash dispersal of Phytophthora cactorum from infected strawberry fruit by simulated canopy drip. Phytopathology, 79: 425-432.
Smith, B. J., and Black, L. L. (1990). Morphological, cultural, and pathogenic variation among Colletotrichum species isolated from strawberry. Plant Disease, 74: 69-76.
Smith, J. A., and De Veaux, R. D. (1994). A stochastic model relating rainfall intensity to raindrop processes. Water Resources Research, 30: 651-664.
Ulbrich, C. W. (1983). Natural variations in the analytical form of the raindrop distribution. Journal of Climate and Applied Meteorology, 22: 1764-1775.
Ulbrich, C. W. (1985). The effects of drop size distribution truncation on rainfall integral parameters and empirical relations. Journal of Climate and Applied Meteorology, 24: 580-590.
Walklate, P. J., McCartney, H. A., and Fitt, B. D. L. (1989). Vertical dispersal of plant pathogens by splashing. Part II. Experimental study of the relationship between raindrop size and the maximum splash height. Plant Pathology, 38: 64-70.
Wilson, L. L., Madden, L. V., and Ellis, M. A. (1990). Influence of temperature and wetness duration on infection of immature and mature strawberry fruit by Colletotrichum acutatum. Phytopathology, 80: 111-116.
Yang, X., and Madden, L. V. (1993). Effect of ground cover, rain intensity, and strawberry plants on splash of simulated raindrops. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 65: 1-20.
Yang, X., Madden, L. V., and Brazee, R. D. (1991). Application of the diffusion equation for modeling splash dispersal of point source pathogens. New Phytologist, 118: 295-301.
Yang, X., Madden, L. V., Reichard, D. L., Fox, R. D., and Ellis, M. A. (1991). Motion analysis of drop impaction on a strawberry surface. Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 56: 67-92.
Yang, X., Madden, L. V., Reichard, D. L., Wilson, L. L., and Ellis, M. A. (1992). Splash dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum and Phytophthora cactorum from strawberry fruit by single drop impactions. Phytopathology, 82: 332-340.
Yang, X., Madden, L. V., Wilson, L. L., and Ellis, M. A. (1990). Effects of surface topography and rain intensity on splash dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum. Phytopathology, 80: 1115-1120.
Yang, X., Wilson, L. L., Madden, L. V., and Ellis, M. A. (1990). Rain splash dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum from infected strawberry fruit. Phytopathology, 80: 590-595.
