Förster, H., Adaskaveg, J. E., Kim, D. H., and Stanghellini, M. E. (1998). Effect of phosphite on tomato and pepper plants and on susceptibility of pepper to Phytophthora root and crown rot in hydroponic culture. Plant Disease, 82, 1165-1170.
Tomato and pepper plants were grown hydroponically in a greenhouse using either phosphate or technical and commercial formulations of phosphite as sources of phosphorus nutrition. The study aimed to determine the effects on plant development and susceptibility to Phytophthora root and crown rot. Phosphite-treated tomato and pepper plants exhibited phosphate deficiency, resulting in symptoms of phosphorus deficiency. The growth of plants (measured by leaf area and dry weights of leaves, stems, and roots) that received phosphite fertilization was significantly (P < 0.05) reduced compared to those fertilized with phosphate. In pepper plants inoculated with Phytophthora capsici, the incidence of crown rot was significantly reduced in those treated with phosphite compared to untreated plants and those treated with phosphate. The incidence of crown rot in pepper plants treated with 1 mM phosphate plus 0.3 mM phosphite was intermediate between those treated with only phosphite (1 mM or 0.1 mM) and those treated with phosphate (1 mM).
Additional keywords: phosphonate fungicides, phosphorous acid.
Phosphorus nutrition in plants is primarily provided in various forms of phosphates, which are salts of phosphoric acid. Although phosphates are naturally present in soil, their availability is often limited, necessitating soil amendments with commercial fertilizers to ensure adequate phosphorus nutrition. Phosphonates are reduced phosphorus compounds with selective effectiveness against oomycetous fungi. The question has been raised as to whether phosphonates can replace phosphates as a phosphorus source, potentially offering additional disease control benefits. Currently, several commercial products containing phosphonate (e.g., phosphite, the salt of phosphorous acid) are available as supplemental soil and foliar fertilizers for various crops.
The goal of our study was to investigate and quantify plant growth responses following root application of selected phosphorus formulations and to determine their effects on plant susceptibility to Phytophthora root rot. Specifically, we aimed to assess whether phosphorous acid or its salt, phosphite, could substitute for phosphate fertilization and support healthy plant development in tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum) and green pepper (Capsicum annuum).
A hydroponic growing system was established for tomato and green pepper plants. Tomato plants (cv. Bonny Best Improved, Seminis Seed Company, Woodland, CA) and green pepper plants (cv. Joe Parker) were grown from seeds in a root cube growth medium. Seeds were sown in 75 mm long plastic cylindrical culture tubes (18 mm in diameter) filled with the growth medium.
The recirculating nutrient-film hydroponic system was set up in a greenhouse on the University of California-Riverside campus. The system was established on eight greenhouse benches. Six 3-meter-long PVC pipes, each 10 cm in diameter, were placed on each bench. Seven evenly spaced sets of three holes were made in each of the six PVC pipes, into which plant culture tubes were inserted. Seedlings of uniform size were selected and transferred into the hydroponic system after 10 to 14 days (considered day 1 of the hydroponic experiment). After one week, two plants per set of three were removed to ensure uniformity among the plants.
Nutrient solutions were pumped from a 40-liter reservoir for each bench through drip irrigation hoses connected to one end of each PVC tube using emitters that dispensed 3.8 liters per hour. Solutions were collected at the opposite end through drain holes and returned to the reservoir via additional drip irrigation hoses. Thus, each bench corresponded to one treatment.
Air temperature, relative humidity, leaf wetness, water temperature, and water electrical conductivity for each treatment were monitored every minute using electronic sensors and dataloggers (Campbell Scientific, Logan, UT). Data were summarized daily to provide average, maximum, and minimum values for each sensor.
Technical phosphite (phosphorous acid) was supplied by Rhône-Poulenc Ag Co. (Research Triangle Park, NC). The pH of each nutrient solution was adjusted to 5.5 using 3 N HCl. Nutrient solutions were changed twice during the tomato experiments (after 8 and 15 days) and twice during the pepper experiments (after 6 and 15 days). This involved interrupting the flow of the nutrient solutions, draining the old solutions from the tubes, and refilling the nutrient reservoirs with new solutions. Before resuming the experiments, the tubes were washed with the new solutions.
Inoculation of Pepper Plants with P. capsici: Two procedures were used for inoculation. In the first experiment, 5 ml of a zoospore suspension (5,000 zoospores per ml) of P. capsici (isolate 6143 from green pepper plants, obtained from C. Lidell, New Mexico State University) was...
Tomato plants (6 plants per treatment) and pepper plants (8 plants per treatment) were harvested 23 days after being transferred into the hydroponic system. To determine leaf areas, photographs of all leaves from four individual plants were taken and scanned into a computer using PHOTOSHOP version 4.0 (Adobe Systems, Inc., San Jose, CA). The total leaf area per plant was calculated using Image-Pro Plus version 1.3 (Media Cybernetics, Silver Spring, MD). Dry weights for the stems, leaves, and roots of tomato plants, as well as the shoots and roots of pepper plants, were obtained after drying the tissues for 2 days at 65°C. Experiments using tomato plants were repeated three times in spring and summer, with single replications of six plants per treatment. Experiments with pepper plants were conducted twice in summer, also with single replications of eight plants per treatment.
Disease incidence of P. capsici–inoculated green pepper plants was visually determined at the time when all inoculated control plants exhibited Phytophthora crown rot. This occurred approximately 2 weeks after inoculation in the first experiment and 4 weeks after inoculation in the second experiment. Tissue samples from the roots or lower stems were used for the reisolation of P. capsici on a modified Kannwischer and Mitchell medium (cornmeal agar containing 5 µg of pimaricin, 50 µg of rifampicin, 100 µg of ampicillin, 100 µg of PCNB, and 50 µg of hymexazol per ml).
For both tomato and pepper plants, samples were ground using a mortar and pestle and passed through a 0.417-mm sieve. Phosphate analysis of the nutrient solutions was performed before and after each nutrient solution change in the tomato experiments. The analyses were conducted by the DANR Analytical Laboratory at the University of California, Davis.
For tomato growth parameters, three experiments were conducted, and the means of six plants per treatment per experiment were treated as replications in the statistical analysis. For leaf areas, data were available from only two experiments. For the statistical analysis of phosphate concentrations in tomato plants, the dried leaf samples of the six plants from each treatment were combined, resulting in one composite leaf sample for each treatment across the three experiments. Statistical analysis of disease incidence in pepper plants was based on the means of eight plants from each of the two experiments. The dry weights of pepper shoots were determined only in the second experiment. The mean dry weight of eight shoots per treatment was calculated, but no statistical analysis was performed. For the phosphate analysis of pepper plants, dried shoot tissue from eight plants in the second experiment was combined, with no statistical analysis conducted. The statistical analysis of phosphate levels before and after changing each nutrient solution was based on four samples, two from each of the two experiments. Data were analyzed using analysis of variance procedures, and multiple comparisons of means were performed using least significant difference (LSD) procedures from SAS 6.10 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC).
Plant growth using phosphate as the sole phosphorus source was significantly increased compared to the no-phosphorus control or plants supplied with phosphite alone (Figs. 1 and 2). There was a significant difference in stem dry weights between the two phosphate levels (0.1 mM or 1 mM), with a trend toward higher leaf and root dry weights, as well as leaf area, observed for the 0.1 mM phosphate treatment compared with the 1 mM phosphate-treated plants, respectively. Root dry weights averaged 860.8 ± 608.9 mg, 75.2 ± 93.0 mg, and 69.9 ± 51.9 mg per plant for phosphate- and phosphate/phosphite-treated plants, phosphite-treated plants, and no phosphorus-treated plants, respectively.
The combined 1 mM phosphate/0.3 mM phosphorous acid treatment significantly increased tomato leaf area compared to all other treatments, and a trend was observed for higher leaf dry weight. For all phosphate treatments, leaf areas and dry weights of leaves, roots, and stems were approximately two to fivefold higher compared with the phosphite and no-phosphorus control treatments (Fig. 2A to D).
Average and maximum/minimum environmental parameters for the three experiments were: air temperature at 22.3°C (27.9/17.9°C), relative humidity at 76.5% (86.7/60%), water temperature at 23.5°C (28.3/20.1°C), and temperature-corrected electrical conductivity at 1.41 mS/cm (1.9/1.1 mS/cm).
The growth responses of pepper plants fertilized with phosphite (0.1 or 1 mM) exhibited similar leaf areas and dry weights for leaf, stem, and root tissue as the no-phosphorus control (Fig. 2A to D). Differences were observed between the phosphate and phosphite or no-phosphorus treatments. Shoot dry weights averaged 4,626.3 ± 2,124.9 mg, 332.4 ± 205.9 mg, and 190.7 ± 91.5 mg per plant for phosphate- and phosphate/phosphite-treated plants, phosphite-treated plants, and no phosphorus-treated plants, respectively.
Disease evaluation of P. capsici-inoculated pepper plants revealed symptoms including discolored roots and girdling dark lesions on the hypocotyls (crown rot), often resulting in plant death. Crown rot incidence was significantly lower (P < 0.05) in plants supplied with either phosphite formulation.
Phosphorus or phosphate-treated plants (Fig. 3) exhibited varying disease responses. Plants fertilized with a combination of phosphate (1 mM) and phosphite (0.3 mM) showed an intermediate response compared to the high susceptibility of both phosphate-treated and no phosphorus-treated plants, as well as the low disease incidence observed in phosphite-treated plants (Fig. 3). Between 2 and 4 weeks after inoculation in both experiments, plants without phosphorus died, and disease incidence generally increased in both phosphate- and phosphite-treated plants. However, most plants treated with the commercial form of phosphorous acid remained healthy after 4 weeks.
The effects of different phosphorus sources on the incidence of Phytophthora root and crown rot in green pepper plants grown in a recirculating nutrient-film hydroponic system were evaluated after inoculation with Phytophthora capsici. Consistent recovery of P. capsici was noted from all inoculated control (no phosphorus) plants, while the 0.1 mM phosphate treatment was not inoculated. Data represent the average from two experiments, with means calculated from eight plants per experiment. Bars sharing the same letter are not significantly different based on analysis of variance and least significant difference (LSD) mean separation (P > 0.05). No significant difference in phosphate concentration was found between the no-phosphorus and phosphite treatments (Table 1).
Table 1 summarizes the phosphate concentrations (mg/ml) in tomato and pepper plants as well as in nutrient solutions of the hydroponic culture system. The treatments with 1 mM phosphate or a combination of 1 mM phosphate and 0.3 mM phosphite had the highest phosphate concentrations, approximately 10-fold higher than the 0.1 mM phosphate solution. The data shows that there was no significant change (P > 0.05) in phosphate concentration in the solutions after 6 to 8 days of circulation in the hydroponic system compared to freshly prepared solutions. Phosphate concentrations in tomato leaves were significantly higher for phosphate-treated plants compared to all other treatments. Additionally, the phosphate concentration in the leaves of plants treated with the commercial formulation of phosphite was significantly higher than that of no-phosphorus-treated and 0.1 mM phosphite-treated plants. The available root tissue for analysis in phosphite-treated and no-phosphorus-treated plants was insufficient for phosphate analysis, and thus no root analyses were conducted. Similar results were found for the phosphate concentrations in the pepper plants.
Evaluating the effect of combined phosphate and phosphite nutrition, Carswell et al. (3) found that adding phosphite (1.5 to 10 mM) to phosphate-limited Brassica nigra seedlings reduced plant growth. In phosphate-sufficient plants, only the 10 mM phosphite levels caused a reduction. Additionally, while the root-to-shoot ratios of phosphate-stressed plants were typically high (3, 11, 13), phosphite supplementation decreased the root-to-shoot ratio to about 40% of control values. Carswell et al. (3) explained these effects as a disruption of the phosphate-starvation response by phosphonates, causing phosphate-limited plants to behave as though they are phosphorus-sufficient. In our study, root-to-shoot ratios of tomato plants were also significantly lower for phosphorous acid-fertilized plants compared to no-phosphorus plants, indicating similar effects on phosphate metabolism. However, a combined treatment of 1 mM phosphate and 0.3 mM phosphorous acid increased leaf area significantly in two experiments, with a trend for greater leaf dry weight compared to phosphate treatment alone in three experiments. This finding might explain the labeling of commercial phosphite formulations as supplemental fertilizers for improved plant growth and increased crop yield. Additional studies are needed to evaluate possible interactions between phosphite and phosphate fertilizers. Phosphorous acid is readily absorbed by plants and is both xylem- and phloem-mobile (10). Using ion chromatography for quantifying phosphorous acid, Ouimette and Coffey (10) demonstrated that phosphonates are quite stable in avocado plants, persisting in this form for at least several months. Similarly, Robertson and Boyer (12) reported a biological inertness of organic and inorganic phosphites. In our experiments, phosphate concentrations in tomato plants treated with technical phosphite did not differ statistically from those of the no-phosphorus control plants. Phosphate levels in the solutions were not significantly different (P > 0.05) when freshly made or after one week in the recirculating hydroponic system, supporting previous work that molecular oxygen does not readily oxidize phosphonates in aqueous solutions (12). A general trend for higher phosphate levels was observed in the 1.0 mM phosphite solutions compared to the no-phosphorus treatment. In both fresh and aged solutions, measurable phosphate levels in the no-phosphorus and 1 mM phosphite treatments ranged from 0.2 to 0.6 µg/ml, respectively. Contamination may have occurred from the salts used in the basic nutrient solution. In plants treated with a commercial formulation of phosphite, phosphate concentrations were significantly above those of the no-phosphorus treated plants. This increase could be explained by the slightly elevated phosphate levels in the nutrient solution. Decreased phosphate concentrations in the plant tissue of the 1 mM phosphate/0.3 mM phosphite treated plants compared to the 1 mM phosphate treated plants aligns with previous studies that showed growth of phosphate-sufficient plants in the presence of phosphite resulted in reduced root and leaf phosphate levels (3). The effect of phosphorus compounds on disease control was studied using P. capsici–inoculated pepper plants. Plants grown with both formulations of phosphorous...
This is the first report demonstrating that both technical and commercial formulations of phosphite significantly reduce the incidence of Phytophthora root and crown rot in pepper. However, these formulations do not provide sufficient phosphorus nutrition to tomato and pepper plants when used as the sole sources of phosphorus in a recirculating hydroponic system. We thank K. Conn for supplying tomato seeds, N. Goldberg for providing pepper seeds, C. Lidell for supplying an isolate of P. capsici, and C. Huang for her excellent technical assistance.
Adams, F., and Conrad, J. P. 1953. Transition of phosphite to phosphate in soils. Soil Sci. 75:361-371.
Bennett, W. F. 1993. Plant nutrient utilization and diagnostic plant symptoms. Pages 1-7 in: Nutrient Deficiencies and Toxicities in Crop Plants. W. Bennett, ed. American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN.
Carswell, C., Grant, B. R., Theodorou, M. E., Harris, J., Niere, J. O., and Plaxton, W. C. 1996. The fungicide phosphonate disrupts the phosphate-starvation response in Brassica nigra seedlings. Plant Physiol. 110:105-110.
Coffey, M. D., and Ouimette, D. G. 1989. Phosphonates: antifungal compounds against oomycetes. Pages 107-129 in: Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Sulphur Utilization by Fungi. Symposium of the British Mycological Society, April 1988. L. Boddy, R. Marchant, and D. J. Reed, eds. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Kannwischer, M. E., and Mitchell, D. J. 1978. The influence of a fungicide on the epidemiology of black shank of tobacco. Phytopathology 68:1760-1765.
Lovatt, C. J. 1990. A definitive test to determine whether phosphite fertilization can replace phosphate fertilization to supply P in the metabolism of ‘Hass’ on ‘Duke 7’. Calif. Avocado Soc. Yearb. 74:61-64.
MacIntire, W. H., Winterberg, S. H., Hardin, D. J., Sterges, A. J., and Clements, L. B. 1950. Fertilizer evaluation of certain phosphorus, phosphorous, and phosphoric materials by means of pot cultures. Agron. J. 42:543-549.
Mengel, K., and Kirkby, E. A. 1987. Principles of Plant Nutrition. International Potash Institute, Worblaufen-Bern, Switzerland.
Ouimette, D. G., and Coffey, M. D. 1989. Phosphonate levels in avocado (Persea americana) seedlings and soil following treatment with fosetyl-Al or potassium phosphonate. Plant Dis. 73:212-215.
Ouimette, D. G., and Coffey, M. D. 1990. Symplastic entry and phloem translocation of phosphonate. Pestic. Biochem. Physiol. 38:18-25.
Rabe, E., and Lovatt, C. J. 1986. Increased arginine biosynthesis during phosphorus deficiency: a response to the increased ammonia content of leaves. Plant Physiol. 81:774-779.
Robertson, H. E., and Boyer, P. D. 1956. The biological inactivity of glucose 6-phosphite, inorganic phosphites, and other phosphites. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 62:380-395.
Rychter, A. M., and Mikulska, M. 1990. The relationship between phosphate status and cyanide-resistant respiration in bean roots. Physiol. Plant. 79:663-667.
Smillie, R., Grant, B. R., and Guest, D. 1989. The mode of action of phosphite: evidence for both direct and indirect modes of action on three Phytophthora species in plants. Phytopathology 79:921-926.
Stanghellini, M. E., Kim, D. H., Rasmussen, S. L., and Rorabaugh, P. A. 1996. Control of root rot of peppers caused by Phytophthora capsici with a nonionic surfactant. Plant Dis. 80:1113-1116.
Stanghellini, M. E., and Rasmussen, S. L. 1994. Hydroponics: a solution for zoosporic pathogens. Plant Dis. 78:1129-1138.
Wilcox, G. E. 1993. Tomato. Pages 137-141 in: Nutrient Deficiencies and Toxicities in Crop Plants. W. Bennett, ed. American Phytopathological Society, St. Paul, MN.
