Abstract: An online database, MycoBank (http://www.MycoBank.org), has been launched with the aim of documenting mycological nomenclatural novelties along with their associated descriptions and illustrations. Each nomenclatural novelty will be assigned a unique accession number that can be cited in the publication where the novelty is introduced. These accession numbers will also be incorporated into Life Science Identifiers (LSIDs) (http://www-124.ibm.com/developerworks/oss/lsid) allocated by the nomenclatural database Index Fungorum (http://www.IndexFungorum.org), with which MycoBank is associated. Nomenclatural experts will be available to check the validity, legitimacy, and linguistic correctness of the proposed names; nomenclatural errors will thus be detected before publication, although no censorship (either nomenclatural or taxonomic) will be exerted by MycoBank. When applicable, MycoBank will provide onward links to other databases containing, for example, living cultures, DNA data, reference specimens, and pleomorphic names linked to the same holomorph. Names will remain strictly confidential until after publication, at which point they will be accessible in MycoBank, Index Fungorum, GBIF, and other international biodiversity initiatives, where they will further be linked to other databases to create a species bank that eventually connects all databases of life. Authors intending to publish nomenclatural novelties are encouraged to contribute to this new initiative.
Key Words: fungal systematics, Index Fungorum, Index of Fungi, International Code of Botanical Nomenclature, MycoBank, mycology, online database.
The names of organisms are crucial for accessing information, and having correct and complete information significantly impacts various fields such as agriculture (including phytopathology and epidemiology) and pharmaceuticals (like ethnobiology), ultimately affecting the entire scientific community. The naming of fungi is regulated by the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (ICBN; Greuter et al. 2000a), which dictates the effective and valid publication of names. The ICBN does not impose restrictions regarding the journals, books, or other printed materials in which new names can be published, in stark contrast to the naming of bacteria, which must be published in or listed in specific journals like the International Journal of Systematic Bacteriology (IJSB) or the International Journal of Systematic and Evolutionary Microbiology (IJSEM). Consequently, new names for fungi can be published across a diverse range of botanical, microbiological, phytopathological, and other scientific journals, books, or proceedings. This broad range makes it exceedingly challenging to stay informed about new taxa as they are named or when existing species names are recombined into different genera. A possible solution to this challenge is the formal registration of names.
The initial concept of a registration system, which involved sending copies of publications to a documentation center, was discussed during a nomenclature meeting in 1954 (Hawksworth 1992). Subsequent proposals were formulated between 1991 and 1998 (Brummitt et al. 1986, Greuter & von Raab-Straube 1998).
Currently, the biological community benefits significantly from central institutions that generate indexes, such as the Index of Fungi, which is published biannually. This index compiles names and associated Life Science Identifiers (LSIDs) and covers all nomenclatural novelties published for fungi, both extant and extinct. It is an indispensable source of information, with content assessed for validity, legitimacy, and orthography. Another related initiative is the online database Index Fungorum, maintained by the Index Fungorum Partnership, which includes CABI Bioscience (UK), the Centraalbureau voor Schimmelcultures (the Netherlands), and Landcare Research (New Zealand). This index is accessible on the Internet at http://www.indexfungorum.org.
In recent years, other databases, such as those for DNA sequences (e.g., GenBank, EMBL), have developed almost automatically, thanks to spontaneous online contributions from individual users. After minimal screening of their submissions, contributors receive an accession number for each deposited sequence, which is typically cited in ensuing publications, as mandated by many scientific journals. These sequence banks have become crucial sources of information and have gained worldwide recognition.
A similar procedure for recording fungal nomenclatural novelties, known as MycoBank, was recently proposed by Crous et al. (2004). This two-step process involves: (1) when a paper is editorially accepted by a journal or book publisher, the author submits the relevant protologue (including a Latin diagnosis, a description in another language, illustrations—optional but recommended—and typification or proposed recombinations with basionyms and type indications) electronically to MycoBank. The proposed names are screened for validity, legitimacy, and orthography and placed in the online database. Initially, access to unpublished names is restricted to maintain confidentiality. Each nomenclatural novelty receives a unique accession number, analogous to a GenBank accession number, which the author can cite in the final version of the paper. If the proposed names do not meet the requirements of the Code, the author is notified and invited to make corrections. (2) After effective publication, the authors communicate the exact date and bibliographic details to MycoBank to lift the access restrictions, making all information (name, text, and illustrations) freely accessible. Direct communication of nomenclatural novelties to MycoBank by publishing journals at the moment of publication would expedite this process.
The responsibility for submitting details of proposed nomenclatural novelties rests with the authors. This process is envisioned as a practice imposed on authors by high-quality journals, similar to the current incorporation of GenBank accession numbers. If the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (ICBN) were to be modified, this could become a mandatory requirement. The date for priority purposes will remain the date of effective publication, assuming the name complies with all requirements for valid publication.
As names and associated data are accessed into MycoBank, LSIDs will subsequently be available from Index Fungorum, and these will be associated with the basic nomenclatural data. Names entering Index Fungorum via the quarterly updates from the Index of Fungi will also receive associated LSIDs; however, they will only appear in Index Fungorum. It will be the responsibility of authors to submit names with accompanying data to MycoBank. The Index Fungorum Partnership has a Memorandum of Cooperation with GBIF to supply nomenclatural data to the ECAT (http://www.gbif.org/prog/ecat), and as such, all data will be accessible through the GBIF portal (http://www.gbif.net), where they will be further linked with other databases.
Figure 1 depicts Aspergillus westerdijkiae, with MycoBank accession number MB500000 (Frisvad et al. 2004). Participants of the Eleventh International Congress on Yeasts (15-20 August 2004, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil) have welcomed this initiative and decided to support it. Yeast researchers will be able to include their new species descriptions online, which will encompass all morphological, physiological, and molecular data. Pictures, textual descriptions, bibliographical references, and relevant internet hyperlinks (such as GenBank and PubMed) will also be made available. The research community will thus have free access to an online, polyphasic, and constantly updated database.
.org:names:500000. Henceforward, we encourage authors and journal editors to follow this lead and deposit their novelties at http://www.MycoBank.org.
The authors are grateful to Drs. Paul F. Cannon, Paul M. Kirk, John C. David (CABI Bioscience, U.K.), and Dagmar Triebel (Botanische Staatssammlung München, Germany) for their constructive comments on this script.
Barrie FR, Greuter W (1999). XVI International Botanical Congress: preliminary mail vote and report of Congress action on nomenclature proposals. Taxon 48: 771-784.
Borgen L, Greuter W, Hawksworth DL, Nicolson DH, Zimmer B (1997). Announcing a test and trial phase for the registration of new plant names (1998-1999). Taxon.
Brummitt RK, Hawksworth DL, McNeill J (1986). Proposals for a method of defining effective publication by means of approved publications. Taxon 35: 823-826.
Crous PW, Gams W, Stalpers JA, Cannon PF, Kirk PM, David JC, Triebel D (2004). An online database of names and descriptions as an alternative to registration. Mycological Research 108: 1236-1238.
Eggli U (1998). Why we don’t need registration. Taxon 47.
Faegri K (1991). Proposals on registration of new names and combinations, and report of Special Committee 4. Taxon 40: 681-683.
Frisvad JC, Frank JM, Houbraken JAMP, Kuijpers AFA, Samson RA (2004). New ochratoxin-producing species of Aspergillus section Circumdati. Studies in Mycology 50: 23-43.
Greuter W, Barrie FR, Burdet HM, Chaloner WG, DeMoulin V, Hawksworth DL, Jørgensen PM, Nicolson DH, Silva PC, Trehane P, McNeill J (1994). International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (Tokyo Code). Regnum Vegetabile 131, Koeltz, Königstein.
Greuter W, Hawksworth DL (1999). Synopsis of Proposals.
Greuter, W., McNeill, J., Barrie, F.R. (1994b). Report on botanical nomenclature, Yokohama 1993. Englera 14: 1-265.
Greuter, W., McNeill, J., Barrie, F.R., Burdet, H.M., Demoulin, V., Filgueras, T.S., Nicolson, D.H., Silva, P.C., Skog, J.E., Trehane, P., Turland, N.J., Hawksworth, D.L. (2000a). International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (Saint Louis Code). Regnum Vegetabile 138, Koeltz, Königstein.
Greuter, W., McNeill, J., Hawksworth, D.L., Barrie, F.R. (2000b). Report on botanical nomenclature, Saint Louis 1999. Englera 20: 1-253.
Greuter, W., Raab-Straube, E. von (1998). Registration progress report. Taxon 47: 497-502.
Hawksworth, D.L. (1992). The need for a more effective biological nomenclature for the 21st century. Botanical Journal of the Linnaean Society 109: 543-567.
Kirk, P.M., Cannon, P.F., David, J.C., Stalpers, J.A. (2001). Dictionary of the Fungi, 9th ed., CABI Publishing, Wallingford.
Turland, N.J., Davidse, G. (1998). Registration of plant names: undesirable, unnecessary, and unworkable. Taxon 47: 957-962.
Wilson, K.L. (1997). Registration as a positive step. Taxon 46: [missing volume/page numbers].
Wilson, K.L. (1998). Why we need registration. Taxon 47: [missing volume/page numbers].
