Malaria-infected mice exhibit a range of sickness behaviours and experience metabolic shifts and physiological pathologies that result in reduced energy expenditure. Treating sick mice with glucose increases disease tolerance by improving the physiological and behavioural symptoms of malaria infection without affecting parasite loads.
When we get an infection, we often feel terrible: we lose our appetite, become less active, sleep more, and experience changes in body temperature. These symptoms, collectively called sickness behaviours, are not specific to infection by particular pathogens; rather, they are observed across a range of host species during various infections. Sickness behaviours can also occur by stimulating the host immune response in the absence of any live pathogen, suggesting that some of the malaise experienced during infection is a host response rather than a direct effect of the pathogen.
To effectively treat disease, it is crucial to focus not only on eliminating the pathogen causing the infection but also on mitigating the symptoms that arise independently of pathogen burden. A better understanding of why our behaviours and physiology change during infection can inform the design of therapeutic interventions that improve our ability to maintain health during illness. In other words, we may be able to use drugs to enhance host disease tolerance. After all, when we become sick, our primary desire is to feel better, regardless of whether the drugs we take eliminate the source of infection.
In a new study featured in this issue of Current Biology, Cumnock et al. find that mice infected with malaria exhibit a range of sickness behaviours, including anorexia, lethargy, and hypothermia. By explicitly testing the link between behavioural and metabolic outputs throughout the entire infection cycle, the authors demonstrated that these symptoms could be alleviated with a relatively simple and inexpensive treatment that enhances glycolysis in severely anaemic mice, making them more tolerant to malaria.
The authors collected high-resolution measurements of both behavioural and physiological responses in healthy and malaria-infected mice. This included metrics such as red blood cell density, body temperature, feeding and drinking rates, activity levels, and metabolic readouts, all measured at five-minute intervals over the course of two weeks. This comprehensive analysis of whole-animal health at such high temporal resolution is rare and allowed the authors to connect changes in behaviour and physiology to metabolic performance and energy expenditure in sick mice.
After five days of malaria infection, mice began to show signs of illness. Malaria parasites were detected in the blood, and peak parasite density coincided with a typical anaemic response, as the number of red blood cells started to decline, accompanied by severe hypothermia. Notably, unlike in humans, malaria causes a drop in temperature in mice. Sickness behaviours such as anorexia and inactivity also manifested during this period, with the time spent eating, drinking, and being active reaching its lowest point by day 10.
While anorexia is a commonly observed symptom in various infections, a unique aspect of the work by Cumnock et al. was their ability to link infection-induced anorexia to changes in energy expenditure and metabolism in sick animals. They observed that mice at their sickest were anorexic and shifted their metabolism from burning sugar to burning fat and ketones. However, fat metabolism requires oxygen, which is critical to note.
To test this hypothesis, the authors provided sick mice with either 2-deoxyglucose, which inhibits glycolysis, or glucose, which supports glycolysis. As expected, treatment with 2-deoxyglucose further deteriorated the health of the malaria-infected animals, resulting in higher peak parasite densities, lower red blood cell counts, hypothermia, and weight loss, ultimately leading to increased mortality. In contrast, glucose-treated mice showed slightly higher survival rates compared to control mice. Importantly, this was not due to an increased ability to clear the parasite, as glucose treatment did not affect parasite density relative to that of control mice. Thus, glucose appears to improve host tolerance to malaria infection without enhancing the ability to clear parasites.
This research raises several important questions regarding how we treat malaria and infections more generally. It suggests that simple nutritional interventions, such as increasing dietary glucose levels, could be beneficial in alleviating the severity of malaria-induced disease. Nutritional immunology, which manipulates nutrition to change the outcome of infections, is an established concept, but the idea of applying such a straightforward intervention to a serious and complex disease like malaria is particularly appealing. It may also have implications beyond host health, such as reducing the likelihood of drug resistance evolution. The influence of host nutritional status on disease tolerance has been demonstrated across a variety of hosts, including invertebrates like water fleas, fruit flies, and butterflies, as well as vertebrates such as birds infected with avian malaria and rodents with intestinal nematode infections. This broad applicability suggests that metabolic control of disease tolerance might be evolutionarily conserved across species.
However, unlike previous studies, the nutritional modulation of disease using glucose, as shown by Cumnock et al., was informed by an understanding of the mechanistic link between infection-induced anorexia and metabolic shifts. Similar effects of anorexia on glucose metabolism have also been observed to enhance disease tolerance to certain bacterial infections, but not others. This indicates that metabolic manipulation may be a promising approach for novel therapeutic interventions, although the protective effects of glucose supplementation may vary depending on the infection.
Another noteworthy aspect of the work by Cumnock et al. is that by utilizing therapeutic interventions that increase disease tolerance, we shift the focus from merely killing pathogens to enhancing host health. The concept that disease tolerance can provide new therapeutic targets for diseases in general, and malaria in particular, has gained traction in recent years. Therefore, it is tempting to consider that managing infections through metabolic means, such as simple and inexpensive nutritional supplementation, could complement our current arsenal of antimalarial drugs. While we are still a long way from implementing such interventions, the findings of Cumnock et al. bring us closer to achieving this goal.
Hart, B.L. (1988). Biological basis of the behavior of sick animals. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 12, 123–137.
Adelman, J.S., and Martin, L.B. (2009). Vertebrate sickness behaviors: adaptive and integrated neuroendocrine immune responses. Integr. Comp. Biol. 49, 202–214.
Vale, P.F., McNally, L., Doeschl-Wilson, A., King, K.C., Popat, R., Domingo-Sananes, M.R., Allen, J.E., Soares, M.P., and Kümmerli, R. (2016). Beyond killing: can we find new ways to manage infection? Evol. Med. Public Health 2016, 148–157.
Ayres, J.S., and Schneider, D.S. (2012). Tolerance of infections. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 30, 271–294.
Cumnock, K., Gupta, A.S., Lissner, M., Chevee, V., Davis, N., and Schneider, D.S. (2018). Host energy source is important for disease tolerance to malaria. Curr. Biol. 28, 1635–1642.
Min-Oo, G., Fortin, A., Tam, M.-F., Nantel, A., Stevenson, M.M., and Gros, P. (2003). Pyruvate kinase deficiency in mice protects against malaria. Nat. Genet. 35, 357–362.
Ponton, F., Wilson, K., Cotter, S.C., Raubenheimer, D., and Simpson, S.J. (2011). Nutritional immunology: a multi-dimensional approach. PLoS Pathog. 7, e1002223.
Wale, N., Sim, D.G., Jones, M.J., Salathe, R., Day, T., and Read, A.F. (2017). Resource limitation prevents the emergence of drug resistance by intensifying within-host competition. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 114, 13774–13779.
Vale, P.F., Wilson, A.J., Best, A., Boots, M., and Little, T.J. (2011). Epidemiological, evolutionary, and coevolutionary implications of context-dependent parasitism. Am. Nat. 177, 510–521.
Ayres, J.S., and Schneider, D.S. (2009). The role of anorexia in resistance and tolerance to infections in Drosophila. PLoS Biol. 7, e1000150.
Howick, V.M., and Lazzaro, B.P. (2014). Genotype and diet shape resistance and tolerance across distinct phases of bacterial infection. BMC Evol. Biol. 14, 56.
Sternberg, E.D., Lefe‘vre, T., Li, J., de Castillejo, C.L.F., Li, H., Hunter, M.D., and de Roode, J.C. (2012). Food plant-derived disease tolerance and resistance in a natural butterfly-plant-parasite interaction. Evolution 66, 3367–3376.
Cornet, S., Bichet, C., Larcombe, S., Faivre, B., and Sorci, G. (2014). Impact of host nutritional status on infection dynamics and parasite virulence in a bird-malaria system. J. Anim. Ecol. 83, 256–265.
Clough, D., Prykhodko, O., and Ra˚berg, L. (2016). Effects of protein malnutrition on tolerance to helminth infection. Biol. Lett. 12, 20160189.
Weis, S., Carlos, A.R., Moita, M.R., Singh, S., Blankenhaus, B., Cardoso, S., Larsen, R., Rebelo, S., Schauble, S., Del Barrio, L., et al. (2017). Metabolic adaptation establishes disease tolerance to sepsis. Cell 169, 1263.
Wang, A., Huen, S.C., Luan, H.H., Yu, S., Zhang, C., Gallezot, J.-D., Booth, C.J., and Medzhitov, R. (2016). Opposing effects of fasting metabolism on tissue tolerance in bacterial and viral inflammation. Cell 166, 1512–1525.
Pamplona, A., Ferreira, A., Balla, J., Jeney, V., Balla, G., Epiphanio, S., Chora, A., Rodrigues, C.D., Gregoire, I.P., Cunha-Rodrigues, M., et al. (2007). Heme oxygenase-1 and carbon monoxide suppress the pathogenesis of experimental cerebral malaria. Nat. Med. 13, 703–710.
Ra˚berg, L., Sim, D., and Read, A.F. (2007). Disentangling genetic variation for resistance and tolerance to infectious diseases in animals. Science 318, 812–814.
Gozzelino, R., Andrade, B.B., Larsen, R., Luz, N.F., Vanoaica, L., Seixas, E., Coutinho, A., Cardoso, S., Rebelo, S., Poli, M., et al. (2012). Metabolic adaptation to tissue iron overload confers tolerance to malaria. Cell Host Microbe 12, 693–704.
The provided list contains references to various studies related to disease tolerance and resistance, focusing on malaria and other infections, with insights into nutritional and metabolic influences on these processes. Each citation includes the authors, year, title, journal, and page numbers for easy reference.
