COLLETOTRICHUM Martin B. Dickman University of Nebraska Department of Plant Pathology Lincoln, Nebraska 68583 USA 1. INTRODUCTION 
The genus Colletotrichum represents a large number of economically important Ascomycete fungi which collectively cause anthracnose disease or leaf blights on all significant agricultural crops and ornamental plants around the world. Colletotrichum spp. often serve as models in studies ranging from pathogenic development and differentiation to plant­ microbe interactions. During establishment and colonization of host plants, members of this genus uniquely acquire nutrients via biotrophy and necrotrophy. Thus in a single interaction, these fungal pathogens exhibit two modes of nutrient acquisition; initially nutrients are acquired from living cells after which a necrotrophic phase is initiated and the same fungus then obtains nutrients from dead cells which have been killed by the fungus. 
A given species of this genus can exhibit both of these strategies separately or concurrently. 
In addition, these fungi develop a series of specialized infection related structures including germ tubes, appressoria, primary intracellular hyphae and secondary necrotrophic hyphae. 
Colletotrichum species thus are experimentally attractive organisms to study the molecular, biochemical and cellular basis of fungal pathogenicity, development and signal transduction (see Bailey and Jeger, 1992; Prusky et aI., 1999). 
Despite significant developments over the last ten years, the taxonomy of Colletotrichum is in a state of flux. Many uncertainties exist in the systematics of fungal pathogens from this genus, depending on the taxonomic "guides" the number of species can range from 29 to over 700 (von Arx, 1957; Sutton, 1992). One of the most confusing species is C. gloeosporioides. For example, 594 species of Colletotrichum were reclassified by Von Arx as synonyms of C. gloeosporioides. Identification has relied primarily on morphological characteristics of conidia, vegetative and sexual structures, and on host specificity and cultural characteristics (von Arx, 1957). Unfortunately conidial morphology and colony characteristics vary even within isolates. Consequently, classical methods have been supplemented with biochemical and molecular technologies coupled with classical methods 
J. W. Kronstad (ed.), Fungal Pathology, 127-148. © 2000 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 127 128 M. B. Dickman to differentiate Colletotrichum species. For a more complete discussion of this topic, see Sherriff et ai. (1994). 
This review focuses on current research into the infection process of Colletotrichum species with overall emphasis on how signal transduction influences prepenetration morphogenesis including conidiation, conidial attachment, conidial germination, germ tube formation, and appressorial differentiation. Post-penetration biotrophic and necrotrophic growth patterns will also be described. In addition, intriguing studies involving host specificity and chromosome transfer will be summarized. 2. APPROACHES TO IDENTIFYING COLLETOTRICHUMDIFFERENTIATION 
AND PATHOGENICITY GENES AND PROTEINS 
Differentiation of Colletotrichum infection structures and Colletotrichum-plant interactions have been studied by several approaches. Examples of these approaches will be illustrated throughout this chapter. Genes which are differentially expressed during infection have been identified by subtractive hybridization, differential screening and differential display reverse transcriptase-PCR. For example, several genes expressed during appressorium formation by C. gloeosporioides have been cloned by these techniques (Hwang et aI., 1995). 
Differential screening of a cDNA library prepared from nitrogen-starved axenic cultures of 
C. gloeosporioides led to the isolation of a glutamine synthetase gene that is upregulated during infection of Stylosanthes guianensis (Stephenson et aI., 1997). 
Complementation of genes in model organisms is a powerful technique for characterizing signaling protein function. Two notable signaling proteins from fungal plant pathogens which complement defects in "tester" organisms are the tb3 protein kinase gene from C. trifolii (Buhr et aI., 1996), and the PMKl MAP kinase gene fromM grisea (Xu and Hamer, 1996). The TB3 kinase complemented the colonial phenotype in N crassa (due to disruption of the cot-l protein kinase gene) and PMKI complemented a mating defect in S. cerevisiae (due to deletion of the FUS31KSSl MAP kinase genes). 
A serine/threonine kinase gene (elkl) expressed by C. lindemuthianum and required for pathogenicity on P. vulgaris has been identified by insertional mutagenesis (Dufresne et aI., 1998). The gene is constitutively expressed, but the mutant cannot penetrate. Mutants in 
C. graminicola with unpigmented spores or weakened cell walls have recently been identified by restriction enzyme mediated integration (REM!) (Epstein et aI., 1998). 
Developmentally regulated proteins in C. lindemuthianum have been identified and characterized with monoclonal antibodies (Mabs) (Green et aI., 1995). Mabs were raised either to homogenates of germlings grown in liquid culture (Pain et aI., 1992), or to infection structures isolated from bean leaves (Pain et aI., 1994a, b). Recently, one of these Mabs (UB25), was used as a probe for expression cloning and a gene was isolated encoding a fungal glycoprotein present at the biotrophic interface in host cells (Perfect et aI., 1998, see later). 