Result 0 :
For example, benomyl was shown to effectively reduce the incidence of anthracnosecrown rot (Horn et al., 1972; Howard, 1971)and was used intensively by strawberrygrowers for years to control anthracnoseand other diseases. However, the anthracnosepathogens, C. acutatum and C. fragariae,developed resistance to it and other bendimidazole fungicides (LaMondia, 1995;McInnes et al., 1992a; Smith and Black,1992, 1993), and benomyl was no longereffective for anthracnose control in strawberry fields. In-vitro trials have been used toscreen fungicides for their ability to controlanthracnose (LaMondia, 1993; McInneset al., 1992b; Smith and Black, 1992). Smithand Black (1993) reported that all 16 C.acutatum, 14 out of 18 C. fragariae, and bothC. gloeosporioides isolates they tested invitro were resistant to benomyl and that allbenomyl-resistant isolates were also resistantto carbendazim, which is in the same class offungicides as benomyl. In a greenhousestudy, plants treated with propiconazole hadlower disease severity ratings than did plantstreated with captafol or benomyl (Smith andBlack, 1991). However, the propiconazoletreated plants were shorter with dark greenleaves that appeared thicker than the leaves ofuntreated plants.

Result 1 :
CONCLUSIONSAs our knowledge of the anthracnosepathogens and the epidemiology of anthracnose diseases has increased, so has our abilityto control these diseases. Changes in culturalpractices have resulted in reduced levels ofdisease. At the same time, development ofmore effective fungicides and their registration for use on strawberries have greatlyreduced losses due to both anthracnose crownrot and fruit rot. Anthracnose-resistant cultivars also have reduced economic losses dueto these diseases. Even so, growers maysustain severe losses when environmentalfactors are highly favorable for anthracnosedevelopment.

Result 2 :
Anthracnose is a key limiting factor for strawberry production in Taiwan and many other areas. Outbreaks of anthracnose in strawberry nurseries and fields have caused yield losses of up to 50–80%2,18,51,52. This study demonstrated the diversity of pathogenic Colletotrichum species associated with strawberry in Taiwan. The findings offer precise information about pathogen identity, which is valuable for screening of resistant varieties and development of effective disease management strategies. Regardless of whether it was inoculated on wounded or non-wounded leaves, the predominant pathogen C. siamense caused larger lesions at 30 °C than 25 °C, which is meaningful in subtropical Taiwan and areas with a similar phenology. Because no significant difference was observed between the mycelial growth rates of C. siamense at 25 °C, 28 °C, and 30 °C, higher disease severity at 30 °C could be due to reduced resistance of strawberry against anthracnose at higher  temperatures53,54. In Taiwan, the susceptible cultivar ‘Taoyuan No. 1’ has been widely cultivated for over 30 years. Development of temperature-independent resistant cultivars will be particularly important for strawberry breeding programs in Taiwan and other tropical and subtropical regions. Future work will focus on monitoring pathogen population changes, investigating the fungicide sensitivity levels of different Colletotrichum species, and developing molecular detection methods to aid the production of strawberry seedlings without latent infection of major Colletotrichum species.

Result 3 :
Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1991. Greenhouseefficacy of fungicides for control of anthracnose crown rot of strawberry, p. 221–223. In:A. Dale and J. Lubby (eds.). The strawberryinto the 21st century. Timber Press, Portland, OR.Smith, B.J. and L.L. Black. 1992. In vitro activityof fungicides against Colletotrichum fragariae.

Result 4 :
Fungicide efficacy has been determined in in-vitro, greenhouse, and field studies, and pathogen resistance to somefungicides has been detected. Anthracnose-resistant cultivars are a major objective of most strawberry breeding programsin the southern United States.Colletotrichum species cause serious diseases of many fruit and vegetable cropsworldwide, and three species, C. fragariae,C. acutatum, and C. gloeosporioides, causeanthracnose diseases of strawberry (Smithand Black, 1990). Since the 1930s, anthracnose crown rot caused by C. fragariae andC. gloeosporioides has been a destructivedisease in strawberry nurseries and fruitproduction fields in the southeastern UnitedStates (Brooks, 1931). In 1986, the presenceof the anthracnose fruit rot pathogen,C. acutatum, was first reported on strawberryin the United States (Smith and Black, 1986).

Result 5 :
The greatest economic losses due toanthracnose on strawberry are from fruit rotcaused by C. acutatum, which also infectsmany other fruit and vegetable crops, including apples, tomatoes, peppers, peaches, blueberries, blackberries, and grapes (Bernsteinet al., 1995; Howard et al., 1992; Smith,2002). The presence of the pathogen has beenreported on strawberries in almost all areasof the world where they are grown. Crowninfections of strawberry plants by C. acutatum often result in stunted plants rather thanMention of trade names or commercial products inthis article is solely for the purpose of providingspecific information and does not imply recommendation or endorsement by the U.S. Departmentof Agriculture.1To whom correspondence should be addressed;e-mail Barbara.Smith@ars.usda.govHORTSCIENCE VOL. 43(1) FEBRUARY 2008 69plant death. Infected plants usually do notthrive after transplantation and produce fewberries at harvest.

Result 6 :
ANTHRACNOSE CULTURALCONTROL MEASURESBecause the primary source of infection inmost fruiting fields appeared to be infectedtransplants, strawberry growers in the southeastern United States were advised after theanthracnose crown rot epidemics in the 1980sto obtain their transplants from nurseries inthe northern United States, Canada, or California that were believed to be outside therange of C. fragariae. More recently, C.acutatum has been found in some of thenurseries in these areas. McInnes et al.

Result 7 :
Anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum spp. is a serious threat to strawberry production, especially in warm and humid  climates2. Rain-splashed conidia of Colletotrichum spp. serve as the major inoculum causing epidemics of strawberry anthracnose  disease3. After landing on the plant surface, the conidia germinate, form appressoria, then penetrate the epidermal  cells4. Colletotrichum spp. can infect various strawberry tissues, causing black spots or irregular spots on leaves, sunken black spots or necrosis lesions on petioles, stolons, and fruits, and wilting of the whole plant due to crown  rot2. Under high humidity, concentric rings of acervuli with orange conidial masses can be observed on necrotic tissues. In the US state of Florida, anthracnose causes the death of up to 80% of seedlings in the nursery and yield losses of over 50% in the  field2. In Taiwan, strawberry seedlings are propagated from March to September, and the high temperature, high humidity and heavy rainfall during open1Miaoli District Agricultural Research and Extension Station, Council of Agriculture, Executive Yuan, Miaoli County  36346,  Taiwan.  2Department  of  Plant  Pathology  and  Microbiology,  National  Taiwan  University,  Taipei City 10617, Taiwan. *email: thhung@ntu.edu.tw; sst@ntu.edu.tw; clchung@ntu.edu.twhttp://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1038/s41598-020-70878-2&domain=pdf2Vol:.(1234567890)Scientific RepoRtS |        (2020) 10:14664  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-70878-2www.nature.com/scientificreports/this period provide a suitable environment for epidemics. From 2010 to 2016, anthracnose crown rot caused the loss of 30–40% of seedlings and ~ 20% of plants after  transplanting5.

Result 8 :
Epidemiology and Pathology of Strawberry Anthracnose:A North American PerspectiveBarbara J. Smith1U.S. Department of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service, Thad Cochran Southern Horticultural Laboratory,Small Fruit Research Unit, P.O. Box 287, Poplarville, MS 39470Additional index words. Colletotrichum acutatum, C. fragariae, C. gloeosporioides, Fragaria ·ananassa, disease control, fungicidesAbstract. Three Colletotrichum species—Colletotrichum acutatum J.H. Simmonds (teleomorph Glomerella acutata J.C.Guerber & J.C. Correll), Colletotrichum fragariae A.N. Brooks, and Colletotrichum gloeosporioides (Penz.) Penz. & Sacc. inPenz. [teleomorph Glomerella cingulata (Stoneman) Spauld. & H. Schrenk]—are major pathogens of strawberry (Fragaria·ananassa). Strawberry anthracnose crown rot has been a destructive disease in commercial strawberry fields in thesoutheastern United States since the 1930s. The causal fungus, C. fragariae, may infect all aboveground plant parts;however, the disease is most severe when the fungus infects the crown, causing crown rot, wilt, and death. Colletotrichumgloeosporioides was responsible for an epidemic of anthracnose crown rot in strawberry nurseries in Arkansas and NorthCarolina in the late 1970s. The anthracnose fruit rot pathogen, C. acutatum, was first reported in 1986 on strawberry in theUnited States. Since the 1980s, increased losses due to anthracnose fruit and crown rots in the United States may be relatedto changes in cultivars and to widespread use of annual plasticulture production rather than the matted-row productionsystem. Anthracnose investigations in the United States have concentrated on its epidemiology and differences among thethree causal Colletotrichum spp. in their cultural, morphological, and molecular characteristics; their infection processes;and their pathogenicity. Results from these studies have resulted in a better understanding of the diseases and have led tobetter disease control. Strawberries grown in soils with high nitrogen levels are more susceptible to anthracnose than arethose grown in soils with lower nitrogen levels or those amended with calcium nitrate. Anthracnose is spread more rapidlyin fields that have overhead irrigation and plastic mulch than in fields where drip irrigation and straw mulch are used.

Result 9 :
Control of the crown rot phase of strawberryanthracnose through sanitation, breeding forresistance, and benomyl. Plant Dis. Rep.56:515–519.Howard, C.M. 1971. Control of strawberryanthracnose with benomyl. Plant Dis. Rep.55:139–141.Howard, C.M. 1983. Black leaf spot phase ofstrawberry anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum gloeosporioides (= C. fragariae). PlantDis. 67:1144–1146.

