This study investigated the combined effects of irrigation systems, mulching materials, and genetic resistance on the incidence of strawberry anthracnose, caused by Colletotrichum acutatum. The research involved field experiments with artificial inoculation using fruits colonized by the pathogen.
One experiment analyzed the impacts of three irrigation methods: drip irrigation, overhead sprinkler irrigation, and localized low-pressure tape irrigation. Additionally, it assessed the effects of two types of mulch: grass (Brachiaria sp.) and plastic (polyethylene). This was organized in a split plot, randomized complete block design with four replicates.
Lower disease incidence was observed with low-pressure tape and drip irrigation, which indicated reduced pathogen dispersal.
Flower blight and fruit rot incidence in drip-irrigated plots was minimal (approximately 2% compared to other irrigation methods).
Grass mulch significantly reduced flower blight in sprinkler irrigation systems (up to 80%), but showed no significant impact when disease levels were already low due to other irrigation methods.
A second experiment compared the effects of grass mulch, pine (Pinus elliottii) mulch, and plastic mulch with overhead sprinkler irrigation on two strawberry cultivars: ‘Dover’ (partially resistant) and ‘Campinas’ (susceptible). Both organic mulches reduced flower blight and diseased fruit incidence by up to 76% compared to plastic mulch, especially during the early stages of the epidemics. ‘Dover’ showed a 70% lower incidence of flower blight than ‘Campinas’, with organic mulch effects being more pronounced in ‘Campinas’.
A third experiment, combining all three irrigation systems with inoculated and non-inoculated plots, estimated yield effects due to disease and irrigation method. All plots were covered with plastic mulch in a completely randomized design (CRD) with six treatments. Results confirmed that sprinkler irrigation led to higher incidences of flower blight and fruit rot. In inoculated treatments, fruit yield was significantly reduced in tape-irrigated plots, more so in sprinkler-irrigated plots, while drip-irrigated plots experienced only a 1% reduction in yield.
Overall, the study highlights the importance of cultural practices and genetic resistance in managing strawberry anthracnose effectively.
Mulches and the choice of a partially resistant cultivar significantly reduced disease levels in field plots. The importance of water splash for Colletotrichum acutatum dispersal, along with its dependency on the characteristics of soil mulch, are likely causes for the observed results.
Keywords: Colletotrichum acutatum; fruit blight; fruit rot; strawberry; Fragaria x ananassa.
Anthracnose is one of the main diseases affecting strawberry (Fragaria ananassa) production worldwide, causing significant yield losses and contributing to a large part of the fungicide schedule still adopted by Brazilian growers. Several species of Colletotrichum are associated with this disease, including C. fragariae, C. dematium, C. gloeosporioides, and C. acutatum. Symptoms manifest on fruit, buds, blossoms, petioles, runners, crowns, and foliage. However, the two most destructive forms of the disease are crown rot anthracnose, usually caused by C. fragariae and primarily affecting roots, crowns, and fruit, and flower blight and fruit rot caused by C. acutatum.
Conidia of Colletotrichum are produced in masses immersed in a water-soluble mucilage in reproductive structures known as acervulae, which serve to prevent desiccation. The germination of conidia is inhibited by the mucilage, necessitating its dissolution for germination. Consequently, conidial release and dispersal, as well as the occurrence of disease epidemics, are heavily dependent on free water and water splash. Dispersal of C. acutatum is favored by prolonged rainfall, while brief periods of precipitation are effective for short-distance dispersal among plants.
In Brazil, strawberries are typically cultivated during the dry winter season when irrigation is necessary. The traditional overhead sprinkler irrigation system has been the most popular among growers, but localized systems, such as drip irrigation and low-pressure tape irrigation, have become increasingly common. Localized irrigation, characterized by high application efficiency, is achieved through drip irrigation under plastic mulch or by surface low-pressure streams from plastic tapes. Although drip irrigation is recommended for improving fruit quality, it is more expensive and requires more maintenance than surface plastic tapes.
Strawberry fields are traditionally mulched, a practice that is widespread in Brazil. This approach improves fruit quality and reduces weed control costs. However, studies have shown that plastic mulching also promotes the splash dispersal of Colletotrichum conidia.
Economic losses due to strawberry anthracnose have been significant. Additionally, complete host resistance is not commercially available, and there is known fungal resistance to 155 fungicides. Consumer and environmental concerns about fungicide use are also increasing.
Therefore, we aimed to examine the effects of irrigation systems, mulching materials, and genetically based resistance, as well as their interactions, on the incidence of strawberry anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum acutatum.
All experiments were inoculated with a mix of C. acutatum isolates UnB-1917 and UnB-1922, both collected from commercial fields in Brazlândia, DF, Brazil, and previously identified as virulent by Barros et al. (1997). Prior to field inoculation, isolates were tested on strawberry fruits and re-isolated to ensure virulence. Plots were inoculated with artificially infected strawberry fruits prepared according to Yang et al. (1990a, 1990b).
In the first experiment, plots were infested with 35 diseased strawberry fruits placed on 30-cm diameter aluminum trays, positioned 0.10 m above soil level in the space between beds 70 days after transplanting (DAT). For the second experiment, diseased fruits were placed in open Petri dishes, with five to seven fruits per dish and five dishes per plot, distributed in the center row of each treatment at 68 DAT. In the third experiment, one focus of infection was created in each plot by placing five diseased fruits around the most central plant of each treatment at 65 DAT. Throughout the study, the identity of C. acutatum as the causal agent of the observed symptoms was confirmed by periodic pathogen isolation from symptomatic flowers.
The effects of irrigation systems and mulching materials were first studied on the cultivar Campinas IAC-2712, which is susceptible to anthracnose. Three systems of irrigation were compared: (a) overhead sprinkler irrigation; (b) localized low-pressure tape irrigation; and (c) drip irrigation.
Sprinkler irrigation was conducted at an average outflow of 0.12 l/s, with 200 sprinklers (West-Wa1) placed 0.80 m above the soil surface. The localized low-pressure tape irrigation system utilized low-density, laser-perforated plastic tapes (Santape1) with perforations 0.15 m apart and an outflow of 12 l/h per meter. For the drip-irrigated plots, two plastic drip irrigation lines were placed between the plant rows, with emitters (Typhoom1 125) set 0.30 m apart, each having an outflow of 1.65 l/h. Irrigation events were carried out every 2 or 3 days, with water depth calculated according to Klar (1991) and adjusted for each system’s efficiency (Pair et al. 1983). Soil moisture was monitored periodically with tensiometers. To minimize wind effects on water distribution, irrigation was always performed in the morning, except on the day of inoculation when irrigation was applied immediately after inoculation at sunset.
Two mulching materials were compared: (a) 0.03-mm black, non-permeable polyethylene plastic, equivalent to the mulch adopted by most strawberry growers in Brazil, and (b) sun-dried grass mulch (Brachiaria sp.), collected from areas adjacent to the experiment, applied to a depth of approximately 4 cm. Mulches were placed on the plots 25 DAT.
The incidence (%) of flower blight was recorded for all plants at growing radial distances from the foci. The percentage of flowers showing symptoms of flower blight was estimated through weekly counts of symptomatic flower buds and the total number of flower buds at 20, 27, 34, 41, 47, and 55 days after inoculation (DAI).
The plot calculations were conducted according to Shaner and Finney (1977). The percentage of diseased fruits was calculated by recording the number of mature healthy and damaged fruits. Fruits were harvested weekly, starting 72 days after transplanting (DAT), when more than two-thirds of the fruit surface was red. The incidence of diseased fruit was recorded at each harvest.
The experiment followed a 3 × 6 × 2 factorial design in a split-plot arrangement with four replicates. The irrigation system was the whole-plot factor, while mulching material was the sub-plot factor. The beds measured 1.10 × 0.20 m, with three rows of plants spaced 0.35 m apart. Each experimental unit consisted of two parallel beds with three lines of seven plants, totaling 42 plants. The experimental plots were separated longitudinally by 0.60 m of bare soil to minimize inter-plot interference. Incidence data were normalized prior to statistical analysis, and mean separation was performed. Area Under the Disease Progress Curve (AUDPC) values were also subjected to ANOVA followed by mean separation using Tukey’s multiple range test.
The single and combined effects of mulching materials and partial host resistance on the incidence of flower blight were studied under overhead sprinkler irrigation conditions. Three mulching materials were compared: (a) 0.03-mm black, non-permeable polyethylene plastic, (b) sun-dried grass mulch (Brachiaria sp.), and (c) sun-dried pine mulch (Pinus elliottii) collected from a nearby reforestation area to a depth of approximately 4 cm. The mulches were applied to the plots 25 days after transplanting (DAT).
Two cultivars with different resistance levels to anthracnose were compared: (a) cv. Campinas IAC 2712 (susceptible) and (b) cv. Dover (partially resistant). Although ‘Dover’ is reported to be resistant to Colletotrichum acutatum (Howard et al. 1992; Denoyes-Rothan et al. 1999), the resistance is not complete, and significant losses due to anthracnose have been noted in Brasília for this genotype (Furlanetto et al. 1996). The incidence of flower blight and diseased fruits (%) was recorded weekly at 23, 29, 37, and 44 days after infection (DAI). AUDPCs were calculated as previously described.
The experiment was a 2 × 3 factorial in a split-plot design with three replicates. The whole-plot factor was cultivar, and the sub-plot factor was mulching material. Each experimental unit consisted of one bed with 18 plants arranged in three lines of six. The plots were separated longitudinally by 0.60 m of bare soil. Disease data were analyzed using ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple range test for mean separation.
A third experiment aimed to estimate the effects of disease and irrigation systems on fruit yield. The effects of overhead sprinkler irrigation, localized low-pressure tape irrigation, and drip irrigation were compared on inoculated and non-inoculated plots of cv. Campinas. All plots were covered with plastic mulch as described earlier.
The experiment was designed as a 2 × 3 factorial in a completely randomized design, featuring six treatments and six replicates. Each experimental unit consisted of one bed with 21 plants distributed in three lines of seven plants. Inoculated and non-inoculated beds were spaced 1.0 m apart, with a perpendicular plastic barrier placed between beds to reduce inter-plot interference.
The following variables were recorded: (a) incidence of flower blight; (b) incidence of diseased fruits; and (c) total fruit yield. Disease data were analyzed using ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple range test for mean separation.
First flower blight symptoms due to C. acutatum were observed...
Localized low-pressure overhead tape irrigation was applied 20 days after inoculation (DAI) (Figure 1a). Disease occurrence in the drip-irrigated treatment was only observed very late in the season at 47 DAI, albeit at a low incidence of 0.2%. In the early stages of the epidemics (20 DAI), the interaction between irrigation systems and mulching materials was significant (P < 0.05), indicating that the effects of the mulches were influenced by the irrigation system used. The highest incidence of flower blight was found in the combination of overhead irrigation and plastic mulch (Figure 1a). Later in the epidemics (27–47 DAI, not shown), significant interactions between irrigation and mulching materials were no longer observed (P > 0.05). The lack of significant interactions between the main factors allowed for separate comparisons of the irrigation systems and mulch types (Figure 2). Disease levels were lower in low-pressure tape-irrigated plots than in those irrigated by overhead sprinklers, regardless of the mulch material applied (Figure 2a, Table 1). Similarly, disease levels in plots covered with grass mulch were lower than in those using plastic mulch (Figure 2b).
At the later stages of the epidemics (55 DAI), the interaction between irrigation systems and mulching material became significant (P < 0.01): for overhead-irrigated plots, the use of plastic mulch increased the incidence of flower blight more than threefold, while no significant effect of mulching material was observed for the drip-irrigated or plastic tape-irrigated plots (Figure 1b). No significant interactions between irrigation and mulching materials were found for the area under the disease progress curves (AUDPCs) of the incidence of blighted flowers. The average AUDPC values for drip, plastic tape, and overhead irrigation were significantly different (P < 0.01), while AUDPCs between plastic and grass mulch were similar (P > 0.05, Table 1).
First symptoms of diseased fruits were observed at 35 DAI. Diseased fruits often exhibited orange-colored masses of spores over lesions. Similar to the incidence of blighted flowers, the percentage of diseased fruits was significantly higher in the overhead-irrigated plots (21%), followed by plastic tape (17%) and drip irrigation (6% diseased fruit). The incidence of diseased fruit was similar between grass and plastic mulched plots, ranging between 14.2%. While no disease gradient was observed in the plastic mulched plots, in the grass mulched plots, a higher number of diseased fruits were found closer to the inoculum source, decreasing gradually with increasing distances from the inoculum (not shown).
Figure 2 illustrates the disease progress curves for the single main effects of irrigation system and mulch material on the incidence of flower blight: the main effects of the irrigation system are shown above, and the main effects of mulching material are shown below. No significant interactions were observed for the areas under disease progress curves (AUDPCs) between the irrigation system and mulch material.
The first symptoms of flower blight in this experiment were observed at 23 DAI, when a significantly lower percentage of blighted flowers was found in the plots treated with grass mulch (Figure 3a, P < 0.05). No effects of genetic resistance or interactions between mulching material and cultivar were detected at this point in the epidemics. By 29 DAI, the incidence of blighted flowers in the plots treated with plastic mulch was greater than in the plots with grass mulch.
The effect of genetic resistance was significant at 29 days after inoculation (DAI) (P < 0.05). The disease incidence on cultivar Campinas reached 23.3% of flowers, while cultivar Dover had only 7.5% of blighted flowers. No interaction between mulching material and cultivar was observed in the early stages of the epidemics.
Table 1 summarizes the areas under disease progress curves (AUDPC) for the main effects of irrigation systems and mulching material. The table indicates the effect of different irrigation methods: drip irrigation showed an AUDPC of 3.40, low-pressure irrigation had 210.65, and overhead irrigation recorded 360.25. The effect of mulching material was also noted, with grass mulch yielding significant differences in disease progress. Values followed by the same letter within each main effect are significantly different according to Tukey’s multiple range test (P < 0.01).
In Figure 3, the single main effects of mulch type on flower blight incidence are illustrated for 23 DAI (above) and 29 DAI (below). No significant interactions between mulching material and cultivar genotype were detected at these times during the epidemics. Differences among cultivars remained significant later in the epidemics at 37 and 44 DAI (P < 0.01), although the effect of mulching material ceased to be significant (P > 0.05). Lower percentages of blighted flowers were observed on cultivar Dover (always below 15%), while disease incidence on cultivar Campinas ranged between 45% and 50%.
Figure 4 presents disease progress curves for the single main effects of mulching material and partial genetic resistance on flower blight incidence. The main effects of mulching material are shown above, and the effects of cultivar genotype are depicted below. No significant interactions were observed for the AUDPCs between mulching material and genotype (P < 0.01). Cultivar Campinas had disease units more than three times higher than those of Dover. Although the shape of the disease progress curves suggested a more rapid disease progression in plastic mulched plots, AUDPC values for mulch treatments were similar (P > 0.05).
Despite lower flower blight incidence, a higher percentage of diseased fruit was found in plots of cultivar Dover (33%) compared to Campinas (17.4%). This is likely due to the intense destruction of flowers in Campinas early in the season, resulting in fewer fruits available for later infection. Because more flowers of cultivar Dover survived earlier, more healthy fruit tissue was available for infection later in the season. Diseased fruit incidence was significantly affected by the interaction between mulching material and cultivar genotype (P < 0.05). The effect of mulching material varied for each cultivar: while the incidence of diseased fruit for Dover was unaffected by mulching material, plastic mulch increased the incidence of damaged fruit for Campinas compared to either pine or grass mulch treatments.
In the drip-irrigated plots, only low frequencies of flower blight were observed, and disease was detected much later in the season (50 DAI). No symptoms were noted in the non-inoculated control plots. Throughout the entire duration of the epidemics, the highest percentage of infected flowers was found in the overhead-irrigated plots, followed by those irrigated with low-pressure tapes. The incidence of blighted flowers in overhead-irrigated plots was consistently 2- to 5-fold greater than in the other irrigation methods.
In the study of tape-irrigated plots, no disease was recorded in the drip-irrigated plots (see Table 3). The first symptoms of fruit disease in this experiment were observed early in the overhead-irrigated plots at 7 days after inoculation (DAI). In contrast, the first symptoms in the drip-irrigated plots appeared only at 27 DAI. The percentage of infected mature strawberry fruits was low in drip-irrigated plots (less than 1%), intermediate in low-pressure tape-irrigated plots (3.1%), and significantly higher in overhead-irrigated plots (10.3%). In the negative controls, the percentage of damaged fruits was lower than 1%, regardless of the irrigation system (see Table 3). Fruit yield did not significantly differ between inoculated and non-inoculated plots under the drip irrigation system.
The incidence of flower blight caused by Colletotrichum acutatum in field conditions, which resemble practices of strawberry growers, was strongly influenced by the irrigation system, type of mulch, and host genetic resistance. Flower blight and fruit rot were minimized when using irrigation systems and mulching types that reduced water splash. Organic materials, particularly dried grass mulch, significantly lowered disease levels under overhead irrigation. Conversely, organic mulches did not have a notable effect on disease levels under localized drip or low-pressure irrigation, likely due to the reduced water splash inherent to these practices.
The data in Table 3 details the percentage of blighted flowers, rotted fruit, and total fruit yield in strawberry plots that were either inoculated or non-inoculated with C. acutatum and subjected to three different irrigation systems. The results indicate that in overhead-irrigated inoculated plots, the percentage of blighted flowers was significantly higher (16.5% at 20 DAI) compared to non-inoculated plots (0.0%). In low-pressure irrigation, inoculated plots had blighted flower percentages of 2.2% at 20 DAI, whereas non-inoculated plots recorded 0.0%. Drip-irrigated inoculated plots showed no blighted flowers at any DAI, while non-inoculated plots also reported 0.0%.
For rotted fruit, overhead-inoculated plots had a 10.3% incidence, while non-inoculated plots had only 0.7%. Low-pressure irrigated inoculated plots had a 3.1% incidence of rotted fruit compared to 0.3% in non-inoculated plots. Drip-inoculated plots had a rotted fruit incidence of 0.7%, with non-inoculated plots showing 0.2%. The total fruit yield varied across irrigation systems, with overhead-inoculated yielding 299 g/plot, while non-inoculated yielded 341 g/plot. Low-pressure plots had yields of 260 g for inoculated and 294 g for non-inoculated. Drip irrigation resulted in yields of 270 g for inoculated and 273 g for non-inoculated plots.
The disease progress curves displayed in Figures 2 and 4 illustrate the effects of different treatments—irrigation, mulch, and cultivar—on strawberry flower blight. The cumulative impacts of the irrigation choice and mulch type, alongside the slow-blighting effects of cultivar resistance, significantly slowed disease progression and reduced final disease levels throughout the planting season. The area under the disease progress curve (AUDPC) values reflected these interactions, indicating that the irrigation system was the primary driver of disease epidemics, while grass mulch played a secondary role.
Several studies (e.g., 720 et al. 1990a, 1990b, 1992; Madden et al. 1992, 1993; Ntahimpera et al. 1998) have noted a significant reduction in the incidence of flower blight in treatments using grass mulch compared to plastic mulch, particularly with natural or simulated precipitation. These effects are observed under common irrigation practices in Brazil. The most likely explanation for this reduction is the decreased dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum conidia, which relies heavily on water splash. While no spatial pattern analyses were conducted, the observed decrease in disease levels with increasing distance from the inoculum source in grass-mulched plots suggests reduced pathogen dispersal in these areas.
In conclusion, our studies on cultural control of strawberry anthracnose demonstrated that the choice of host genotype, localized irrigation, and dried organic mulches significantly reduced disease incidence in the field. There were synergistic effects when these practices were adopted concurrently. In contrast, selecting a more susceptible cultivar, using overhead sprinkler irrigation, and applying plastic mulch favored higher levels of flower blight. While these results should be interpreted with caution due to the lack of perfectly replicated trials, each management factor studied (irrigation system, grass mulch, and host genotype) was replicated in multiple experiments, partially validating these conclusions. Moreover, adopting these cultural practices did not lead to yield loss in the absence of disease. More diseased fruit was found in plots of 'Dover' than in those of 'Campinas' because more flowers of 'Dover' survived earlier in the season, providing more healthy tissue for later infections.
Finally, it is important to emphasize that strawberry production in Brazil remains heavily dependent on fungicide applications, which are not completely effective for anthracnose control and raise consumer concerns about food safety. Our study indicates that managing flower blight can be quite effective through a combination of cultural choices, which could potentially reduce dependency on chemical controls.
Acknowledgements: M.V.S. Coelho was supported by the Brazilian Ministry of Education (CAPES-MEC). F.R. Palma received support from CNPq grant 100408/2006–0. A.C. Café-Filho acknowledges Brazilian National Research Council (CNPq) grant number 306968/2006–1 and Distrito Federal (FAP-DF) grant number 193.000.093/96.
Denoyes-Rothan B, Lafargue M, Guerin G, Clerjeau M. 1999. Fruit resistance to Colletotrichum acutatum in strawberries. Plant Dis. 83:549–553.
Gunnel PS, Gubler WD. 1992. Taxonomy and morphology of Colletotrichum species pathogenic to strawberry.
Kososki RM, Furlanetto C, Tomita CK, Café-Filho AC. 2001. Effect of fungicides on Colletotrichum acutatum and control of strawberry anthracnose in the field.
Trans. Br. Mycol. Soc. 91:694–800.
Maas, J.L. 1998. Compendium of Strawberry Diseases. 2nd ed. Saint Paul: The American Phytopathological Society.
Madden, L.V., Wilson, L.L., Ellis, M.A. 1993. Field spread of anthracnose in strawberry. Plant Disease. 77:861–866.
Madden, L.V., Wilson, L.L., Yang, X., Ellis, M.A. 1992. Splash dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum and Phytophthora cactorum by short-duration simulated rains. Plant Disease. 76:427–436.
Wilson, L.L. 1996. Effects of rain intensity on splash dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum. Phytopathology. 86:864–874.
Nicholson, R.L., Moraes, W.C. 1980. Survival of Colletotrichum graminicola: Importance of the spore matrix. Phytopathology. 70:225–261.
Tanaka, M.A.S., Passos, F.A. 2002. Pathogenic characterization of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. fragariae associated with anthracnose in strawberries. Fitopatologia Brasileira. 27:484–488.
Ntahimpera, N., Ellis, M.A., Wilson, L.L., Madden, L.V. 1998. Effects of a cover crop on splash dispersal of Colletotrichum acutatum conidia. Phytopathology. 88:536–543.
Pair, C.H., Hinz, W.H., Frost, K.R., Sneed, R.E., Schiltz, T.J. 1983. Irrigation. Arlington: Irrigation Association. p. 686.
Peres, N.A., Timmer, L.W., Adaskaveg, J.E., Correl, J.C. 2005. Lifestyles of Colletotrichum acutatum. Plant Disease. 89:784–796.
Pedroso, C., Café-Filho, A.C. 2005. In vitro reaction of Brazilian isolates of Colletotrichum acutatum and C. fragariae to copper and benomyl. Fungicide & Nematocide Tests. 60: SMF042. www.apsnet.org/online/FNtests/ (electronic publication).
Shaner, G., Finney, R.E. 1977. The effect of nitrogen fertilization on the expression of slow-mildewing resistance in Knox wheat. Phytopathology. 67:1051–1054.
