Abstract: Anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum spp. is one of the major problems in mango production worldwide, including Thailand. All mango cultivars are susceptible, but Nam Dok Mai See Thong (NDMST) is the most vulnerable. Through a single spore isolation method, a total of 37 isolates of Colletotrichum spp. were obtained from NDMST showing anthracnose symptoms. Identification was performed using a combination of morphological characteristics, Koch’s postulates, and phylogenetic analysis. The pathogenicity assay and Koch’s postulates on leaves and fruit confirmed that all Colletotrichum spp. tested were causal agents of mango anthracnose. Multilocus analysis using DNA sequences of internal transcribed spacer (ITS) regions, β-tubulin (TUB2), actin (ACT), and chitin synthase (CHS-1) was performed for molecular identification. Two concatenated phylogenetic trees were constructed using either two loci (ITS and TUB2) or four loci (ITS, TUB2, ACT, and CHS-1). Both phylogenetic trees were indistinguishable and showed that these 37 isolates belong to C. acutatum, C. asianum, C. gloeosporioides, and C. siamense. Our results indicated that using at least two loci of ITS and TUB2 was sufficient to infer Colletotrichum species complexes. Of the 37 isolates, C. gloeosporioides was the most dominant species (19 isolates), followed by C. asianum (10 isolates), C. acutatum (5 isolates), and C. siamense (3 isolates). In Thailand, C. gloeosporioides and C. acutatum have been reported to cause anthracnose in mango; however, this is the first report of C. asianum and C. siamense associated with mango anthracnose in central Thailand.
Mango production has expanded to more than 100 countries, with around 44.6 million tons produced annually since 2018. Thailand is a major producer, contributing to almost 8% of global mango production. Due to its flavor and texture, Nam Dok Mai See Thong (NDMST) has become the most popular mango cultivar in Thailand. It is also an early-midseason cultivar, which means it has the potential to produce fruit year-round. Anthracnose caused by Colletotrichum spp. is a significant economic problem...
Symptoms on the leaves manifest as small, dark brown spots often surrounded by chlorotic haloes and irregular margins. Leaf lesions typically remain small; however, under disease-favorable conditions, they can enlarge and fuse together, forming irregular patches. Additional symptoms include premature leaf drop and twig dieback. Any stage of mango fruit can be infected. Mummification is usually observed in young fruit, while no symptoms are noted in mature unripe fruit. On ripe fruit, dark brown irregular lesions appear, which gradually increase in size. Under favorable conditions, salmon to orange fungal conidial masses may be visible on these lesions.
The application of fungicides is a common practice to control anthracnose in mango orchards in Thailand, but it often proves unsuccessful. This ineffectiveness may stem from the emergence of new Colletotrichum species and/or the development of fungicide resistance among the pathogens.
Accurate identification of species is essential for effective management of anthracnose disease. Currently, three Colletotrichum species—C. acutatum, C. boninense, and C. gloeosporioides—have been reported to cause anthracnose in mango. However, the C. gloeosporioides species complex, which consists of ubiquitous fungal pathogens in tropical and subtropical regions, has not been documented in Thailand. The host association and morphological characteristics traditionally used to identify Colletotrichum species are insufficient for distinguishing these pathogens at the species level due to the limited number of morphological traits and the lack of host specificity.
A polyphasic approach combining multilocus phylogenetic analysis with recognizable phenotypic characteristics is recommended for accurate species identification within the Colletotrichum genus. According to Weir et al., internal transcribed spacer (ITS) sequences alone are not reliable for distinguishing different species within the C. gloeosporioides species complex. Additional loci recommended for identifying Colletotrichum species include actin (ACT), calmodulin (CAL), chitin synthase-1 (CHS-1), glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), and β-tubulin (TUB2).
The C. gloeosporioides species complex has not been fully investigated in mango anthracnose in Thailand, and we hypothesize that it could be a potential source of new Colletotrichum species. This study employed an integrative approach involving morphological assays, multilocus phylogenetic analysis, and pathogenicity tests to identify Colletotrichum species infecting mango (NDMST) in Thailand. Here, we report for the first time that C. asianum and C. siamense are causal fungi of anthracnose in mango grown in central Thailand.
Inflorescences, leaves, and fruits showing typical anthracnose symptoms were collected from orchards located in Chachoengsao, Phichit, and Ratchaburi. Visual anthracnose symptoms included inflorescence blight, small brown to black spots, and irregularly shaped lesions with necrotic brown to black areas on leaves. Symptoms on ripe fruit were characterized by small black circular spots and irregular, necrotic, sunken brown to black lesions. In severely infected fruit, extensive rot was observed, and under high humidity, bright orange to pale-colored spore masses could be seen. Infected premature fruits often dropped from the trees. A total of 37 fungal isolates resembling Colletotrichum spp. were obtained.
All isolates were from the NDMST cultivar.
The table presents a detailed collection of Colletotrichum isolates, including their geographical information and source materials. Each isolate is identified by a unique code and categorized by the type of plant material sampled, such as fruit, leaf, or inflorescence. The geographic coordinates for each isolate are provided, showing their precise locations in Thailand.
For example, the first three entries are from Plaeng Yao in Chachoengsao province, with the coordinates 13°36'28.600"N, 101°17'53.500"E corresponding to isolates CS001 and CS002 (both from fruit). There are also additional entries from other locations, such as Mueang Ratchaburi, where isolates RB001 (fruit) and RB002 (leaf) were collected at coordinates 13°35'50.000"N, 99°49'57.100"E. The table indicates that geographic locations were detected using GPS technology.
Based on colony morphology and conidia characteristics, the Colletotrichum isolates were classified into two groups. The first group contained five isolates that were similar to C. acutatum. The colonies grown on Potato Dextrose Agar (PDA) appeared white to grey, while the reverse side of the colony was pale ochreous. The mycelial growth rates at day 3 ranged from 3.33 to 3.77 mm per day.
The analysis showed a similarity of 97%, and five isolates were grouped with Colletotrichum acutatum (CBS 144.29) with a posterior probability of 0.02 and a bootstrap value of 100%.
Figure 2. Morphological characteristics of colonies grown on PDA at day 3, with pictures taken from the front and back of the plates. Appressoria were measured at day 4, and conidia were measured at day 5 after incubation. Representatives of each species are shown: C. acutatum PC011 (a), C. asianum RB001 (b), C. gloeosporioides CS005 (c), and C. siamense RB003 (d).
The incongruence length difference (ILD) test indicated that the ACT, CHS-1, ITS, and TUB2 markers were homogeneous. Consequently, concatenated sequences of these four markers were utilized to generate a phylogenetic tree comprising a total of 81 isolates, including 44 ex-type and epitype strains. The topology of the maximum likelihood (ML) tree was consistent with that of the Bayesian tree; therefore, only the ML tree is presented (Figure 4). Among the 37 isolates, ten clustered with C. asianum strains (ICMP 18580, ICMP 18696, NN8, WM52, and NN19) showing a posterior probability of 0.97 and bootstrap values of 99%. Three isolates formed a clade with C. siamense strains (ICMP 18578, ICMP 17795, ICMP 18121, ICMP 12567, and ICMP 18574) with a posterior probability of 0.97 and bootstrap values of 77%. Nineteen isolates clustered with the C. gloeosporioides strain (ICMP 17821) with a posterior probability of 1.00 and bootstrap values of 99%. Five isolates were clustered with C. acutatum (CBS 112996, IMI 223120, IMI 216370, CBS 144.29, and CBS 979.69) showing a posterior probability of 0.85 and bootstrap values of 99%.
Figure 3. The maximum likelihood tree based on a concatenated dataset of ITS and TUB2 sequences from 47 Colletotrichum isolates, including ex-type and epitype strains retrieved from GenBank. Numbers on the nodes represent bootstrap values (left) and posterior probabilities (right). Colletotrichum isolates from this study are highlighted in grey boxes. The scale bar indicates the number of substitutions per site.
Figure 4. The maximum likelihood tree based on the concatenated dataset of ACT, CHS-1, ITS, and TUB2 sequences from a total of 81 Colletotrichum species, with ex-type and epitype strains retrieved from GenBank. Numbers on the nodes are bootstrap values (left) and posterior probabilities (right). Colletotrichum isolates from this study are shown in red. The scale bar indicates the number of substitutions per site.
A mycelial plug from a 5-day-old culture was inoculated onto unwounded fruit and leaves. Typical anthracnose lesions were observed around the inoculation sites. The anthracnose lesions on fruit enlarged faster than those on leaves by day 5 after inoculation (refer to Table 2 and Figure 5). No lesions were observed on the control fruit or leaves (Figure 5). On inoculated fruit, C. asianum produced the largest lesions, significantly differing from other species, with an average lesion diameter (LD) of 8.16 cm, followed by C. gloeosporioides at 8.07 cm, C. siamense at 7.81 cm, and C. acutatum at 7.61 cm (see Table 2 and Figure 6).
Table 2. This table presents the lesion sizes on NDMST mango fruit and leaves after inoculation by 37 isolates of Colletotrichum spp. It details the average lesion diameters measured in centimeters, highlighting the differences in lesion size among the various species tested.
Values within the same column followed by different letters indicate significant differences based on variance with the least significant difference test at p = 0.05.
Figure 5 illustrates the pathogenicity assay of four different Colletotrichum species on NDMST mango, showing visual anthracnose symptoms developed on fruit (panel a) and leaves (panel b) five days after inoculation. Additionally, appressoria and spores developed on leaves 24 hours after inoculation are shown in panel c. The test included all isolates, but only a representative from each species is presented here.
Figure 6 presents box plots depicting the variation in disease lesion diameter among the four Colletotrichum species associated with mango anthracnose, assessed five days after inoculation with a mycelial plug on unwounded NDMST mango fruit and leaves. The vertical lines in the box plots represent the median, and means followed by different letters indicate significant differences according to the Tukey test.
Significant results were found on inoculated leaves, where C. siamense exhibited the largest lesions, significantly different from the other species with an average lesion diameter (LD) of 1.25 cm. In contrast, the LD means for C. asianum, C. gloeosporioides, and C. acutatum were 0.92 cm, 0.71 cm, and 0.38 cm, respectively (refer to Table 2 and Figure 6). Following the pathogenicity test, all Colletotrichum species were re-isolated from the infected tissues and confirmed by Koch’s postulates, exhibiting identical morphological characteristics to the original isolates.
It is widely accepted that high genetic variation exists within Colletotrichum species complexes due to their broad host range and diverse environments. Mango anthracnose has been associated with various Colletotrichum species. This study aimed to accurately identify the species in the Colletotrichum-mango system in Thailand through a combination of morphological assessments, multilocus sequence analyses, and Koch’s postulates. A total of 37 Colletotrichum species were isolated from mango anthracnose in orchards across central Thailand. Using morphological characteristics such as colony color, growth rate, and the size and shape of conidia and appressoria, 32 isolates were identified as C. acutatum, while five were identified as C. gloeosporioides. Morphological characteristics alone are generally deemed insufficient for species identification, as variations among species can appear similar under different environmental conditions; thus, a multilocus phylogenetic approach was integrated to assist in taxonomy.
We have uncovered for the first time that Colletotrichum asianum and Colletotrichum siamense caused anthracnose in mango in Thailand.
Colletotrichum asianum has been reported as a major species causing mango anthracnose in China. It is the most common endophytic species in mango in northeastern Brazil and has been identified in many countries worldwide, including Australia, China, Colombia, Japan, Malaysia, the Philippines, Sri Lanka, and Taiwan. Additionally, C. asianum can cause disease in avocado (Persea americana Mill.) in Australia. In Thailand, C. asianum has been reported to cause disease in coffee (Coffea arabica L.), but not in mango until this study.
Colletotrichum siamense has also been noted as a significant species causing mango anthracnose in China and eastern Australia. This species has a broad host range in tropical and subtropical regions, capable of infecting banana (Musa spp.), papaya (Carica papaya L.), dragon fruit (Hylocereus spp.), guava (Psidium guajava), and avocado. It was suggested by James et al. that C. siamense is likely a common and widespread saprophyte or endophyte, as the authors were able to isolate it from asymptomatic fruit of other plants, with the exception of mango and avocado. Similar to C. asianum, C. siamense has been reported to cause disease in coffee in Thailand, but not in mango until this study.
Among the four species identified, C. gloeosporioides was the major species causing anthracnose in this study, being found in every orchard from which isolates were taken. The pathogenicity assay demonstrated that all isolates were more aggressive on fruit than on leaves, likely due to the higher sugar content in fruit serving as a carbon source for fungal growth. Both C. asianum and C. gloeosporioides exhibited similar levels of aggressiveness on mango fruit, producing larger lesions compared to C. siamense and C. acutatum. The lesions’ colors also varied slightly; C. asianum produced dark brown spots, while the other three species produced lighter brown spots. In leaf pathogenicity tests, C. siamense was the most aggressive, possibly due to species-specific host responses. Further testing with different mango cultivars is necessary to validate this hypothesis.
The impact of this study is twofold: firstly, it has demonstrated that a combination of morphology, DNA multilocus sequence analysis, and Koch’s postulates is a robust method for identifying species of Colletotrichum. Secondly, this approach has enabled the discovery of previously unreported anthracnose caused by C. asianum and C. siamense in Thailand. This finding raises concerns regarding the potential for cross-infection, as the two species can infect different hosts. Therefore, accurate diagnosis is a crucial first step for disease control and prevention. It supports current quarantine regulations and establishes strategies for integrated management of anthracnose disease across orchards. It is important to note that fungal pathogens, even within the same genus, may respond differently to fungicides. Further studies are essential to determine the fungicide sensitivity of these four Colletotrichum species to help implement effective fungicide management strategies.
Each isolate was inoculated with a 6-mm-diameter plug taken from the actively growing edge of a 5-day-old culture on a PDA plate. The culture was incubated under the same conditions mentioned previously. Fungal growth and colony diameter were recorded daily until there were no changes in diameter (day 3). Fifty conidia were randomly selected for measurement of their length and width on day 5 (when conidia were fully matured) under an Olympus CX31 binocular compound microscope at 400x magnification, using the Olympus CellSens standard software version 1.16 (Olympus Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Appressoria were induced using a slide culture technique. Briefly, the isolates were transferred onto 25.4 × 76.2 mm sterile microscope slides (7101 microscope slides, Shandong Harmowell Trade Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China) and covered with 22 × 22 mm coverslips (Menzel Gläser, Thermo Fisher Scientific Co., Ltd., Waltham, MA, USA), then incubated in a petri dish at 25 °C until maturation, usually for 4 days. Lengths and widths of 30 appressoria per isolate were measured under a microscope. This experiment was performed in five replicates.
Genomic DNA was extracted from a 5-day-old fungal colony, according to Pongpisutta et al. A PCR mixture contained genomic DNA (20 ng), primers, Taq polymerase buffer, MgCl₂, and dNTPs. PCR was performed in a thermal cycler with the following program: 94 °C for 2 minutes, followed by 35 cycles of denaturation at 94 °C for 30 seconds, annealing at 55–58 °C for 30 seconds, and extension at 72 °C for 1 minute, with a final extension step of 72 °C for 10 minutes. The PCR products were visualized on 1.2% agarose gels stained with GelStar® and GeneRuler, and a 100 bp Plus DNA Ladder was used to determine the size of DNA fragments. The PCR products were sequenced by the 1st Base Laboratory Co., Ltd., Seri Kembangan, Malaysia. A basic local alignment search (BLASTn) was performed to analyze nucleotide sequences in comparison to reference sequences available in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) database.
Drainage was collected at 3-day intervals for each treatment to analyze the electrical conductivity (EC) and pH of the irrigation and drainage. The EC and pH were measured using an EC and pH meter (Eutech PC 450 Multi-parameter Meter Kit; Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Water use efficiency (WUE), an index indicating how aerial part growth and fruit yield compared to the retained water content of the plant, was calculated by dividing the retained water content by the fresh weight of the plant aerial parts and fruits.
Growth, fruit quality, and yield characteristics of strawberries were measured according to the Rural Development Administration's Vegetable Research Data Standard Manual. Measurements were taken for 30 plants, including plant height, petiole length, leaf number, leaf length, leaf width, and crown diameter. For 15 plants, fresh weight, dry weight, and leaf area were determined. Among fully developed leaves, the third-newest leaf was used for measuring petiole length, leaf width, and leaf length. The crown diameter was measured with a digital caliper at its maximum diameter. Plant fresh weight was measured using an electronic scale, and dry weight was measured after drying for 72 hours in a dryer at 75 °C. The leaf area was measured using a leaf area meter after removing all leaves from the crown. The fruit quality characteristics investigated included soluble solids content, firmness, acidity, sugar/acid ratio, weight, length, width, and color.
The photosynthetic capacity of the third-newest leaf from three plants was measured in three repetitions on clear days in late April and early May 2022, to investigate the assimilation rate of strawberry plants for each watering treatment. The CO₂ response curve was measured using a photosynthetic meter at an airflow rate of 400 μmol/s, a temperature of 25 °C, and a CO₂ concentration ranging from 0 to 1200 μmol/mol.
Fruits were harvested weekly from 14 December to 28 March. The marketable product was classified into seven categories based on fruit weight: over 42 g, between 37 and 42 g, between 32 and 37 g, between 27 and 32 g, between 22 and 27 g, between 17 and 22 g, and between 12 and 17 g. Fruits weighing less than 12 g were classified as small fruits, and those that were deformed due to insufficient pollination were classified as malformed. The percentage of marketable fruits was calculated by excluding the small and malformed fruits.
The aerial and root parts were separated, and the inorganic content was analyzed according to the Rural Development Administration's research and analysis standards. The material was dried at 75 °C for 72 hours and pulverized.
Table 3 details the primers used in this study, including their sequences and annealing temperatures. Each entry specifies the gene targeted, the forward and reverse primer sequences (in 5' to 3' orientation), and the respective annealing temperature used in the PCR. The table is organized for clarity, allowing readers to quickly identify the relevant primers for each gene, along with their sources for reference.
Multiple sequence alignments were performed using ClustalW alignment implemented in MEGA version X and were manually adjusted for maximum sequence similarity. Bayesian inference (BI) was used to reconstruct phylogenetic trees using MrBayes, with parameters set for 1,000,000 generations, four independent runs, and a sampling interval of 1,000 generations. Maximum likelihood analyses were conducted using MEGA version X based on 1000 bootstrap replicates.
A combination of multilocus phylogenetic analysis, phenotypic characteristics, and Koch’s postulates provides an effective strategy for the identification and characterization of fungal species. We demonstrated that molecular analysis of at least two loci (ITS and TUB2) enables accurate identification of Colletotrichum species causing anthracnose disease in mangoes from central Thailand. This study represents the first report that C. asianum and C. siamense were identified as causative agents of mango anthracnose.
Supplementary Materials: Supporting information can be downloaded at: https://www.mdpi.com/article/10.3390/plants12051130/s1. This includes Table S1, which details the morphological characteristics of colonies, conidia, and appressoria of 37 mango Colletotrichum isolates from central Thailand. Table S2 lists the Colletotrichum isolates used in phylogenetic analysis, including all isolates from this study.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization: C.R. and R.P.; methodology, software, formal analysis, writing—original draft preparation: C.R., P.K., S.B., and R.P.; supervision, project administration, funding acquisition, resources: S.C., C.R., and R.P.; investigation, data curation: C.R., P.K., S.B., V.P., S.C., and R.P.; validation, writing—review and editing: C.R., P.K., S.B., O.M., V.P., S.C., and R.P. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by the Postharvest Technology Innovation Center, Ministry of Higher Education, Science, Research and Innovation, Bangkok, Thailand [Grant No. CRP.3.NOV11.8]; the National Research Council of Thailand (NRCT); and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS) under the NRCT-JSPS joint research program (to R.P. and S.C.).
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: We thank Paul Morris and Raymond Larsen of Bowling Green State University for their critical reading of the manuscript.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
The Top Mango Producing Countries in the World. Available online: https://www.worldatlas.com/articles/the-top-mango-producing-countries-in-the-world.html (accessed on 15 November 2022).
Ðinh, Q.; Sangchote, S. Infection of Colletotrichum gloeosporioides on mango fruit and its resistance. Thai J. Agric. Sci. 2002, 33, 68–70.
Ploetz, R.; Freeman, S. Foliar, floral, and soilborne diseases. In The Mango, 2nd ed.; Botany, Production and Uses, CABI International: Wallingford, UK, 2009; pp. 231–302.
Ploetz, R.C. Diseases of mango. In Diseases of Tropical Fruit Crops; Ploetz, R.C., Ed.; CAB International: Wallingford, UK, 2003; pp. 327–363.
Nelson, S.C. Mango Anthracnose (Colletotrichum gloeosporioides); University of Hawaii: Honolulu, HI, USA, 2008.
Pongpisutta, R.; Rattanakreetakul, C.; Bunjoedchoedchoo, R. Non-chemical fungicide treatments for anthracnose control in mango fruits cv. Nam Dork Mai See Tong. Agric. Sci. J. 2012, 43, 464–467.
Prusky, D.; Alkan, N.; Miyara, I.; Barad, S.; Davidzon, M.; Kobiler, I.; Braun Miara, S.; Lichter, A.; Sherman, A.; Fluhr, R. Mechanisms modulating postharvest pathogen colonization of decaying fruits. In Postharvest Pathology. Plant Pathology in the 21st Century; Prusky, D., Gullino, M., Eds.; Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2009; Volume 2, pp. 43–55.
Prakash, O. Diseases and disorders of mango and their management. In Diseases of Fruits and Vegetables; Naqvi, S.A.M.H., Ed.; Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 2007; Volume 1, pp. 511–619.
Hyde, K.D.; Cai, L.; McKenzie, E.H.C.; Yang, Y.L.; Zhang, J.Z.; Prihastuti, H. Colletotrichum: A catalogue of confusion. Fungal Divers. 2009, 39, 1–17.
Hyde, K.D.; Cai, L.; Cannon, P.F.; Crouch, J.A.; Crous, P.W.; Damm, U.; Goodwin, P.H.; Chen, H.; Johnston, P.R.; Jones, E.B.G.; et al. Colletotrichum—Names in current use. Fungal Divers. 2009, 39, 147–182.
Plant Pathology Research Group. Host Index of Plant Diseases; Plant Protection Research and Development Office, Department of Agriculture: Bangkok, Thailand, 2014.
Prihastuti, H.; McKenzie, E.; Hyde, K.D.; Cai, L.; McKenzie, E.H.C.; Hyde, E. Characterization of Colletotrichum species associated with coffee berries in northern Thailand. Fungal Divers. 2009, 39, 89–109.
White, T.J.; Bruns, T.; Lee, S.; Taylor, J. Amplification and direct sequencing of fungal ribosomal RNA genes for phylogenetics. In PCR Protocols: A Guide to Methods and Applications; Innis, M.A., Gelfand, D.H., Sninsky, J.J., White, T.J., Eds.; Academic Press: San Diego, CA, USA, 1990; pp. 315–322.
R Core Team. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing; R Foundation for Statistical Computing: Vienna, Austria, 2019; Available online: https://www.R-project.org/ (accessed on 10 October 2022).
Agricolae: Statistical Procedures for Agricultural Research, R Package Version 1.4.0. Available online: https://myaseen208.github.io/agricolae/ (accessed on 10 October 2022).
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions, and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions, or products referred to in the content.
