Elmer, W. H., and LaMondia, J. A. 1999. Influence of ammonium sulfate and rotation crops on strawberry black root rot. Plant Dis. 83:119-123.
The combined effects of rotation crops and nitrogen fertilizers were examined on the strawberry black root rot disease complex. In July 1995, microplots were filled with soil that had a history of strawberry black root rot and seeded with two types of oats (Avena strigosa ‘Saia oats’ or A. sativa ‘Garry oats’) or with sorgho-sudangrass (Sorghum bicolor × S. sudanense ‘Triple S’). Microplots planted with 1-year-old ‘Honeoye’ strawberry crowns served as controls. In May 1996, the crops were chopped and incorporated into the soil. The soil was then replanted with 1-year-old ‘Honeoye’ strawberry crowns and fertilized with (NH4)2SO4 or Ca(NO3)2 at equivalent nitrogen rates. Two months later, (NH4)2SO4-treated plants exhibited 36% more leaf area and 41% more runners than strawberries treated with Ca(NO3)2. Strawberries that had been precropped with ‘Saia’ oats produced 135% more runners and 38% more early fruit yield compared to those grown in control microplots. Total fruit yield was not affected by the treatments.
Compared to Ca(NO3)2, the (NH4)2SO4 treatment reduced the percentage of blackened roots. The influence of the cover crops on growth and disease was more pronounced with (NH4)2SO4 fertilization than with Ca(NO3)2. Combining ‘Saia’ oats or sorgho-sudangrass rotation with (NH4)2SO4 fertilization led to a reduction in lesion nematode (Pratylenchus penetrans) numbers in subsequent strawberry roots compared to controls. Furthermore, the combination of ‘Saia’ or ‘Garry’ oats as a precrop with applications of (NH4)2SO4 reduced black root rot severity relative to controls. Only the ‘Garry’ oat rotation reduced strawberry root colonization by Rhizoctonia fragariae when compared to controls. Additional effects associated with (NH4)2SO4 treatment included a decrease in rhizosphere soil pH by 0.2 units, a reduction in fluorescent pseudomonads in the rhizosphere by 10- to 15-fold, and leaves with higher concentrations of nitrogen, potassium, sulfur, manganese, and zinc compared to plants treated with Ca(NO3)2. Therefore, rotation with ‘Saia’ oats combined with (NH4)2SO4 fertilization may suppress strawberry black root rot and enhance yields through multiple effects on the host, pathogens, and associated microflora.
Black root rot is a complex root disease of strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa Duchesne) that causes root death and reduces plant vigor, productivity, and winter hardiness. Certain rapidly growing gram-negative rod bacteria have also been implicated in strawberry black root rot.
The goal of these recommendations is to avoid abiotic stresses, such as drought, winter injury, and heavy wet soils, while employing a two-year rotation with grains. In New England, straw is commonly used as a winter mulch for strawberries, leading many growers to adopt grain rotations to produce straw. However, the effectiveness of rotation crops can vary regarding their susceptibility as hosts to R. fragariae and P. penetrans. Past research has shown that ‘Saia’ oats (Avena strigosa Schreb.) and ‘Triple S’ sorgho-sudangrass (Sorghum bicolor × S. sudanense) are poor hosts for these pathogens, whereas ‘Garry’ oats (Avena sativa L), rye (Secale cereale L), buckwheat (Fagopyrum esculentum Moench), canola (Brassica napus L), and strawberries may either increase or have no effect on the population densities of the pathogens. Additionally, studies by Hildebrand and West indicated that strawberry black root rot increased following specific rotation crops, which were associated with elevated levels of both fluorescing and non-fluorescing gram-negative rod bacteria in the strawberry rhizosphere.
may help suppress diseases by enhancing Mn uptake. Furthermore, manganese-transforming microorganisms may play a role in black root rot, similar to other root diseases. The use of an oat pre-crop can enhance the availability of manganese by influencing the populations of manganese-oxidizing or manganese-reducing bacteria in the soil.
on strawberry growth, nutrition, black root rot incidence, and microbial changes in the rhizosphere.
In July 1995, 48 microplots were established using polyvinyl chloride tubes (15 cm in diameter and 0.46 m long), set 0.3 m deep in Windsor, Connecticut. The tubes were filled with Watchaug fine sandy loam soil (pH 5.9) that had previously been planted with strawberries, where symptoms of black root rot had been severe. Twelve microplots were seeded with 10 to 15 seeds of oat cultivars Garry or Saia, or sorgho-sudangrass.
In May 1996, cover crop residues or surviving strawberry crowns were chopped and incorporated into the soil using trowels. Each plot was then planted with one 1-year-old ‘Honeoye’ strawberry crown. Microplots that had been treated with Ca(NO3)2 or (NH4)2SO4 in 1995 continued to receive the same nitrogen fertilizer in 1996. Each microplot received 85 kg of N/ha (0.01 g of N/microplot) at planting and an additional 85 kg of N/ha in July 1996. All microplots received potassium (K), phosphorus (P), calcium (Ca), and sulfur (S) at total seasonal equivalents of 84, 84, 30, and 45 kg/ha, respectively. In May 1997, at 10% bloom, microplots received 10% of the total 1996 fertilizer rate. A total of 60% of the fertilizer was applied during renovation on July 25, with the remaining 30% applied on September 9.
Sampling and Measurements: In 1996, the treatment effects on black root rot and plant health were assessed by counting the runners, which were removed weekly in June and July, and by measuring leaf area (A) in late June and late July. Leaf area was determined using the equation: A = 3.02 + 1.77 L × W (R² = 0.98), where L and W represent the length and width of the middle leaflet of each strawberry leaf. This equation was derived from regression analysis of the products of lengths and widths from 84 ‘Honeoye’ strawberry leaves against their leaf areas, measured with a leaf area meter (Delta-T Devices, Pullman, WA). In June 1997, berries were harvested, counted, and weighed across a total of eight harvest dates. Early fruit harvests are more economically significant than later ones, so early yield was defined as the total harvest from the first four pickings. Runners were not removed during the 1997 growing season, which is standard practice in strawberry cultivation.
In September 1997, the microplots were removed from the surrounding soil, and the plants with their roots and soil were extracted from each microplot. Loose soil was gently dislodged from the roots, and the roots were vigorously shaken into plastic bags to sample the rhizosphere soil. The soil was immediately stored on ice until it could be refrigerated at 4°C. The plant tops and roots were separated just below the junction where the petioles are attached to the crown. The roots and plant tops were washed in tap water to remove soil, blotted dry between absorbent paper towels, and weighed. The foliar portions were oven-dried and weighed.
Root systems were evaluated for black root rot by estimating the percentage of blackened roots. Roots were sampled for pathogen isolation. From each root system, 1-cm sections were cut from two young structural roots that emerged from the crown (crown roots), two blackened perennial roots devoid of feeder roots (main perennial roots), and two feeder roots. Root sections were washed in tap water, rinsed with distilled water, and placed on water agar. Plates were incubated for 5 days at room temperature and examined microscopically at 200× magnification. Each root section was scored for colonization by Rhizoctonia spp., Fusarium spp., Pythium spp., other fungi, or no colonization. Results were presented as percent root colonization. Lesion nematodes were extracted from roots by agitating 2 g of chopped roots (0.5 to 1 cm long) in water for 5 days, decanting the nematodes onto sieves, and counting them under a microscope. Results were expressed as the number of lesion nematodes per gram of root.
Tissue Analyses: The leaf samples collected in 1996 were dried to constant weights at 50°C and ground to a powder using a mortar and pestle. Dried tissue (1 g) from three replicate plants in one block was combined with 1 g of dried tissue from three plants in another block. A total of 0.5 g from these two combined samples was digested with 5 ml of HCl and 10 ml of HNO3 in a CEM MDS 81D microwave (CEM Co., Matthews, NC). The samples were then diluted to 50 ml with deionized water. The elements potassium (K), phosphorus (P), calcium (Ca), magnesium (Mg), sulfur (S), iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), zinc (Zn), copper (Cu), and boron (B) were quantified using plasma spectrophotometry on a Thermo Jarrell Atom Scan spectrophotometer, with results expressed as µmol/g dry weight. Nitrogen was determined using the Kjeldahl procedure; 0.25 g of leaf tissue from the two bulked samples was heated and digested in 4 ml of H2SO4 and 10 ml of H2O2, followed by colorimetric analysis for total nitrogen. Values were averaged and presented as µmol/g dry weight.
Statistical Procedures: Data were subjected to analysis of variance for a blocked factorial design. Since there were no significant interactions between the treatments and the Hamden site or with the Windsor site at P = 0.05, values from both sites were combined for analysis and presentation. Mean separation was performed using the Student-Newman-Keuls Test at P = 0.05.
Results: Differences in leaf area were observed in July 1996 (see Table 1), but not in June (data not shown). Plants fertilized with (NH4)2SO4 exhibited a 36% increase in leaf area (P = 0.02) and a 41% increase in runners (P = 0.02) compared to those treated with Ca(NO3)2. Pre-cropping with 'Saia' oats resulted in a 35% increase in runners (P = 0.04) compared to continuous strawberry culture. In June 1997, early berry yields were higher in plants pre-cropped with Saia oats compared to controls (P = 0.04). Total yield was not significantly affected, although trends mirrored those of the early yield. Nitrogen fertilizers did not influence yield. In September 1997, the fresh weights of roots from strawberry plants pre-cropped with Saia oats and treated with (NH4)2SO4 were greater than any other treatment combination (P = 0.05). Additionally, fertilization with (NH4)2SO4 produced plants that were 17% larger than those fertilized with Ca(NO3)2 (P = 0.05). Pre-cropping with Saia oats resulted in strawberry plants with more dry weight than controls (P < 0.001).
We calculated a fresh root weight to fresh top weight ratio to evaluate the effects of treatments on the distribution of plant weight. Treatment with Ca(NO3)2 resulted in plants with root systems that weighed proportionately less than their tops compared to plants fertilized with (NH4)2SO4 (P = 0.05).
There was a significant interaction between the two oat cover crops and (NH4)2SO4 fertilization in reducing the percentage of blackened roots compared to other treatments (P = 0.01).
Nematodes were recovered in greater densities from roots treated with (NH4)2SO4 than with Ca(NO3)2 (P = 0.001).
The rhizosphere pH in soil treated with (NH4)2SO4 was 4.81, compared to 5.08 for Ca(NO3)2 (P = 0.001). However, there were no differences between the cover crops (see Table 3). The rhizosphere soil of (NH4)2SO4-treated plants had a 10- to 15-fold reduction in the number of fluorescent pseudomonads compared to Ca(NO3)2-treated rhizosphere soil (P < 0.001). Total heterotrophic bacteria and Mn-reducing microbes were not affected by the treatments.
The mineral composition of the strawberry leaves sampled in September 1996 did not significantly differ between the two sites, except for the elements N, K, Mg, and S, which were in greater concentrations in Windsor than in Hamden. Since there were no interactions between site and treatments, values from both sites were combined for analysis and presentation (see Table 4). Leaf concentrations of N, K, S, and Zn in plants treated with (NH4)2SO4 were significantly increased by 7% to 30%, while Mn levels were significantly increased by 103% compared to those fertilized with Ca(NO3)2. Both sorgho-sudangrass and oat species increased the leaf concentrations of Ca and Mg compared to control plants.
Combining Saia oats as a single-season rotation with (NH4)2SO4 fertilization produced larger strawberry plants, more early yield, and less damage from black root rot than if Saia oats were combined with Ca(NO3)2 or if another rotation crop was paired with the (NH4)2SO4 treatment. Rotating strawberries with sorgho-sudangrass and fertilizing with (NH4)2SO4 reduced lesion nematodes but did not affect disease severity or yield. Similarly, Garry oats reduced disease severity and root colonization by R. fragariae but did not increase plant growth or yield.
Table 1 presents the growth and yield components of strawberry plants grown in microplots infested with black root rot pathogens. The data includes early berry yield, total berry yield, fresh root weight, dry foliar weight, and the fresh root to shoot ratio for plants pre-cropped with various cover crops and fertilized with either (NH4)2SO4 or Ca(NO3)2. Notably, values are presented as means, and statistically significant differences from controls are indicated.
Table 2 shows the percentage of blackened roots and recovery of Rhizoctonia fragariae and lesion nematodes (Pratylenchus penetrans) from strawberry roots of plants grown in microplots. It details the percentage of roots colonized by Rhizoctonia sp., blackened roots, and nematode counts per feeder root, categorized by cover crop type. The data highlight significant differences in root health and nematode recovery, with some treatments showing lower percentages of blackened roots and nematodes.
In February 1999, it was reported that rotating with oats and fertilizing with NH4-N can suppress take-all disease in wheat. Our findings support the hypothesis that combining oat rotation with NH4-N fertilization can reduce root diseases in plants. Both oat cultivars suppressed black root rot under the (NH4)2SO4 regime but differed in their effects on the two main pathogens. Saia oats reduced the number of root lesion nematodes but did not affect root colonization by Rhizoctonia spp. In contrast, Garry oats reduced root colonization by Rhizoctonia spp. but did not affect the numbers of lesion nematodes. Furthermore, the Saia oat pre-crop increased early berry yield, whereas Garry oats had no significant effect. The yield increase following rotation with Saia oats may have been due to its unsuitability as a host for the lesion nematode, which, in these soils, may have been a more yield-reducing pathogen. In other experiments, we found that Saia oats were similar to Garry oats in reducing R. fragariae recovery from soil (14; J. A. LaMondia, unpublished research). Therefore, the failure of Garry oats to affect yield may be attributed to its high susceptibility to the lesion nematode. The resistance of Saia oats to the lesion nematode was first recognized by Colbran (3), who noted its utility in suppressing re-plant problems in apple orchards. Townsend (24) later demonstrated that Saia oats were resistant to Pratylenchus neglectus Rensch and P. penetrans. However, the resistance to the lesion nematode does not entirely explain the effects of Saia oats on disease and yield, as sorgho-sudangrass also reduced lesion nematodes but had no significant impact on disease severity or yield. The reduction in nematode densities by sorgho-sudangrass may have been insufficient to affect yield. Additionally, it is possible that oat straw residues have specific effects on the disease. Papavizas (18) reported that oat (presumably A. sativa) straw residues increased the number of antagonistic bacteria to R. solani and other fungal pathogens in soil. Since we did not examine antagonism, it is unclear whether the residues of Avena spp. act differently toward soil microbes compared to those of sorgho-sudangrass.
The association of Rhizoctonia spp. with strawberry roots ranges from mycorrhizal to pathogenic (19). Previous studies with this soil type found that nearly all isolates of Rhizoctonia from strawberry roots belonged to the virulent anastomosis groups AG-A, AG-G, and AG-I of binucleate R. fragariae (17). The very low frequency of isolating Pythium or Fusarium spp. suggests that, in these soils, they were not significant factors in the black root rot complex.
Fertilization with (NH4)2SO4 led to greater disease suppression and enhanced plant growth compared to Ca(NO3)2, though yield was not significantly affected. Past studies have shown that (NH4)2SO4 reduced black root rot and increased yield in strawberry (6) and suppressed root diseases in other crops (5, 10, 11). Fertilization with (NH4)2SO4 did not impact the recovery of Rhizoctonia spp. from roots but did increase root weight and the number of lesion nematodes. Since P. penetrans is an obligate parasite that must live in living roots, it is reasonable to find lower densities of this pathogen on roots of dead and declining strawberries, as evidenced in the Ca(NO3)2-treated plants, compared to healthier plants treated with (NH4)2SO4.
The increase in mineral composition in (NH4)2SO4-treated plants compared to Ca(NO3)2-treated plants has been documented previously (5, 6). The doubling of the manganese concentration...
For each cover crop (Strawberry, Garry oats, Saia oats, and Sorgho-sudangrass), the table lists the mean concentrations of key nutrients including nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), potassium (K), calcium (Ca), magnesium (Mg), sulfur (S), manganese (Mn), and zinc (Zn). The values represent the means of different replicates, with some values followed by letters indicating significant differences among cover crops. Additionally, there are mean values calculated for two separate sets of data, reflecting the nutrient content in leaves under different fertilization treatments.
Significant differences among the cover crops and fertilization treatments are indicated, emphasizing how these factors impact the mineral content of the strawberry leaves. For example, the highest nitrogen content was observed in strawberry leaves at 1,407 mg/kg, while the lowest was in Saia oats at 1,102 mg/kg.
The context also discusses findings related to manganese and its potential role in disease suppression in strawberries, based on the influence of various cover crops and their impact on microbial populations in the rhizosphere. The presence of fluorescent pseudomonads and their relationship to plant health and disease is also highlighted, noting that further investigations are needed to clarify their role in black root rot.
Elmer, W. H., and Ferrandino, F. J. 1994. Comparison of ammonium sulfate and calcium nitrate fertilization effects on Verticillium wilt of eggplant. Plant Dis. 78:811-816.
Elmer, W. H., and LaMondia, J. A. 1995. Influence of mineral nutrition on strawberry black root rot. Adv. Strawberry Res. 14:42-48.
Goheen, A. C., and Bailey, J. S. 1955. Meadow nematodes in strawberry plantings in Massachusetts. Plant Dis. Rep. 39:879-880.
Goheen, A. C., and Smith, J. B. 1956. Effects of inoculation of strawberry roots with meadow nematodes, Pratylenchus penetrans. Plant Dis. Rep. 40:146-149.
Hildebrand, A. A., and West, P. M. 1941. Strawberry root rot in relation to microbiological changes induced in root rot soil by the incorporation of certain cover crops. Can. J. Res. Sect. C 19:183-198.
Huber, D. M. 1989. The role of nutrition in the take-all disease of wheat and other small grains. Pages 46-74 in: Soilborne Plant Pathogens: Management of Diseases with Macro- and Microelements. A. Englehard, ed., APS Press, Inc., St. Paul, MN.
Huber, D. M., and McCay-Buis, T. S. 1993. A multiple component analysis of the take-all disease of cereal. Plant Dis. 77:437-447.
Huber, D. M., and Wilhelm, N. S. 1988. The role of manganese in resistance to plant disease. Pages 155-173 in: Manganese in Soils and Plants. R. D. Graham, R. J. Hannam, and J. C. Uren, eds., Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Hussain, S. S., and McKeen, W. E. 1963. Rhizoctonia fragariae species nov. in relation to strawberry degeneration in Southwestern Ontario. Phytopathology 53:532-540.
LaMondia, J. A. 1994. The effect of rotation crops on strawberry black root rot pathogens in field microplots. J. Nematol. 26:108.
LaMondia, J. A., and Martin, S. B. 1989. The influence of Pratylenchus penetrans and temperature on black root rot of strawberry by binucleate Rhizoctonia species. Plant Dis. 73:107-110.
Martin, S. B. 1988. Identification, isolation frequency, and pathogenicity of anastomosis groups of binucleate Rhizoctonia species from strawberry roots. Phytopathology 78:379-384.
Ogoshi, A., Oniki, M., Sakair, R., and Vi, T. 1979. Anastomosis grouping among isolates of binucleate Rhizoctonia. Trans. Mycol. Soc. Jpn. 20:33-39.
Papavizas, G. C. 1963. Microbial antagonists in bean rhizosphere as affected by oat straw and supplemental nitrogen. Phytopathology 53:1430-1435.
Ribeiro, O. K., and Black, L. L. 1971. Rhizoctonia fragariae: a mycorrhizal and pathogenic fungus of strawberry plants. Plant Dis. Rep. 55:599-603.
Riggs, R. D., Slack, D. A., and Fulton, J. P. 1956. Meadow nematodes and their relation to the decline of strawberry plants in Arkansas. (Abstr.) Phytopathology 46:24.
Schippers, B., Bakker, A. W., and Bakker, P. A. H. M. 1987. Interaction of deleterious and beneficial rhizosphere microorganisms and the effect of cropping practices. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 25:339-358.
Shoa, F. M., and Foy, C. D. 1982. Interaction of soil manganese and reaction of cotton to Verticillium wilt and Rhizoctonia root rot. Comm. Soil. Soc. Plant Anal. 13:21-38.
Townsend, J. L. 1963. The pathogenicity of Pratylenchus penetrans to strawberry. Can. J. Plant Sci. 43:75-78.
Townsend, J. L. 1989. Population densities of four species of root-lesion nematodes (Pratylenchus) in the oats cultivar Saia and OAC Woodstock. Can. J. Plant Sci. 69:903-905.
West, P. M., and Hildebrand, A. A. 1941. The microbiological balance of strawberry root rot soil as related to the rhizosphere and decomposition effects of certain cover crops. Can. J. Res. Sect. C 19:199-210.
Wing, K. B., Pritts, M. P., and Wilcox, W. F. 1994. Strawberry black root rot: A review. Adv. Strawberry Res. 13:13-19.
